
Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**eBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These eBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers!*****


Title: Othello, the Moor of Venice

Author: William Shakespeare

Release Date: November, 1998  [EBook #1531]
[Most recently updated: May 19, 2004]

Edition: 10

Language: English


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK, OTHELLO, THE MOOR OF VENICE ***




This etext was prepared by the Project Gutenberg Shakespeare Team,
a team of about twenty Project Gutenberg volunteers.








OTHELLO, THE MOOR OF VENICE

by William Shakespeare






PERSONS REPRESENTED:

DUKE OF VENICE.
BRABANTIO, a Senator.
Other Senators.
GRATIANO, Brother to Brabantio.
LODOVICO, Kinsman to Brabantio.
OTHELLO, a noble Moor, in the service of Venice.
CASSIO, his Lieutenant.
IAGO, his Ancient.
RODERIGO, a Venetian Gentleman.
MONTANO, Othello's predecessor in the government of Cyprus.
CLOWN, Servant to Othello.
Herald.

DESDEMONA, Daughter to Brabantio and Wife to Othello.
EMILIA, Wife to Iago.
BIANCA, Mistress to Cassio.

Officers, Gentlemen, Messenger, Musicians, Herald, Sailor,
Attendants, &c.


SCENE: The First Act in Venice; during the rest of the Play at a
Seaport in Cyprus.



ACT I.

SCENE I. Venice. A street.

[Enter Roderigo and Iago.]

RODERIGO.
Tush, never tell me; I take it much unkindly
That thou, Iago, who hast had my purse
As if the strings were thine, shouldst know of this,--

IAGO.
'Sblood, but you will not hear me:--
If ever I did dream of such a matter,
Abhor me.

RODERIGO.
Thou told'st me thou didst hold him in thy hate.

IAGO.
Despise me, if I do not. Three great ones of the city,
In personal suit to make me his lieutenant,
Off-capp'd to him:--and, by the faith of man,
I know my price, I am worth no worse a place:--
But he, as loving his own pride and purposes,
Evades them, with a bumbast circumstance
Horribly stuff'd with epithets of war:
And, in conclusion, nonsuits
My mediators: for, "Certes," says he,
"I have already chose my officer."
And what was he?
Forsooth, a great arithmetician,
One Michael Cassio, a Florentine,
A fellow almost damn'd in a fair wife;
That never set a squadron in the field,
Nor the division of a battle knows
More than a spinster; unless the bookish theoric,
Wherein the toged consuls can propose
As masterly as he: mere prattle, without practice,
Is all his soldiership. But he, sir, had the election:
And I,--of whom his eyes had seen the proof
At Rhodes, at Cyprus, and on other grounds,
Christian and heathen,--must be belee'd and calm'd
By debitor and creditor, this counter-caster;
He, in good time, must his lieutenant be,
And I--God bless the mark! his Moorship's ancient.

RODERIGO.
By heaven, I rather would have been his hangman.

IAGO.
Why, there's no remedy; 'tis the curse of service,
Preferment goes by letter and affection,
And not by old gradation, where each second
Stood heir to the first. Now, sir, be judge yourself
Whether I in any just term am affin'd
To love the Moor.

RODERIGO.
I would not follow him, then.

IAGO.
O, sir, content you;
I follow him to serve my turn upon him:
We cannot all be masters, nor all masters
Cannot be truly follow'd. You shall mark
Many a duteous and knee-crooking knave
That, doting on his own obsequious bondage,
Wears out his time, much like his master's ass,
For nought but provender; and when he's old, cashier'd:
Whip me such honest knaves. Others there are
Who, trimm'd in forms and visages of duty,
Keep yet their hearts attending on themselves;
And, throwing but shows of service on their lords,
Do well thrive by them, and when they have lin'd their coats,
Do themselves homage: these fellows have some soul;
And such a one do I profess myself. For, sir,
It is as sure as you are Roderigo,
Were I the Moor, I would not be Iago:
In following him, I follow but myself;
Heaven is my judge, not I for love and duty,
But seeming so for my peculiar end:
For when my outward action doth demonstrate
The native act and figure of my heart
In complement extern, 'tis not long after
But I will wear my heart upon my sleeve
For daws to peck at: I am not what I am.

RODERIGO.
What a full fortune does the thick lips owe,
If he can carry't thus!

IAGO.
Call up her father,
Rouse him:--make after him, poison his delight,
Proclaim him in the streets; incense her kinsmen,
And, though he in a fertile climate dwell,
Plague him with flies: though that his joy be joy,
Yet throw such changes of vexation on't
As it may lose some color.

RODERIGO.
Here is her father's house: I'll call aloud.

IAGO.
Do; with like timorous accent and dire yell
As when, by night and negligence, the fire
Is spied in populous cities.

RODERIGO.
What, ho, Brabantio! Signior Brabantio, ho!

IAGO.
Awake! what, ho, Brabantio! thieves! thieves! thieves!
Look to your house, your daughter, and your bags!
Thieves! thieves!

[Brabantio appears above at a window.]

BRABANTIO.
What is the reason of this terrible summons?
What is the matter there?

RODERIGO.
Signior, is all your family within?

IAGO.
Are your doors locked?

BRABANTIO.
Why, wherefore ask you this?

IAGO.
Zounds, sir, you're robb'd; for shame, put on your gown;
Your heart is burst, you have lost half your soul;
Even now, now, very now, an old black ram
Is tupping your white ewe. Arise, arise;
Awake the snorting citizens with the bell,
Or else the devil will make a grandsire of you:
Arise, I say.

BRABANTIO.
What, have you lost your wits?

RODERIGO.
Most reverend signior, do you know my voice?

BRABANTIO.
Not I; what are you?

RODERIGO.
My name is Roderigo.

BRABANTIO.
The worser welcome:
I have charged thee not to haunt about my doors;
In honest plainness thou hast heard me say
My daughter is not for thee; and now, in madness,
Being full of supper and distempering draughts,
Upon malicious bravery dost thou come
To start my quiet.

RODERIGO.
Sir, sir, sir,--

BRABANTIO.
But thou must needs be sure
My spirit and my place have in them power
To make this bitter to thee.

RODERIGO.
Patience, good sir.

BRABANTIO.
What tell'st thou me of robbing? this is Venice;
My house is not a grange.

RODERIGO.
Most grave Brabantio,
In simple and pure soul I come to you.

IAGO.
Zounds, sir, you are one of those that will not serve God if the
devil bid you. Because we come to do you service, and you think
we are ruffians, you'll have your daughter covered with a Barbary
horse; you'll have your nephews neigh to you; you'll have coursers
for cousins and gennets for germans.

BRABANTIO.
What profane wretch art thou?

IAGO.
I am one, sir, that comes to tell you your daughter and the Moor
are now making the beast with two backs.

BRABANTIO.
Thou art a villain.

IAGO.
You are--a senator.

BRABANTIO.
This thou shalt answer; I know thee, Roderigo.

RODERIGO.
Sir, I will answer anything. But, I beseech you,
If't be your pleasure and most wise consent,--
As partly I find it is,--that your fair daughter,
At this odd-even and dull watch o' the night,
Transported with no worse nor better guard
But with a knave of common hire, a gondolier,
To the gross clasps of a lascivious Moor,--
If this be known to you, and your allowance,
We then have done you bold and saucy wrongs;
But if you know not this, my manners tell me
We have your wrong rebuke. Do not believe
That, from the sense of all civility,
I thus would play and trifle with your reverence:
Your daughter,--if you have not given her leave,--
I say again, hath made a gross revolt;
Tying her duty, beauty, wit, and fortunes
In an extravagant and wheeling stranger
Of here and everywhere. Straight satisfy yourself:
If she be in her chamber or your house
Let loose on me the justice of the state
For thus deluding you.

BRABANTIO.
Strike on the tinder, ho!
Give me a taper!--Call up all my people!--
This accident is not unlike my dream:
Belief of it oppresses me already.--
Light, I say! light!

[Exit from above.]

IAGO.
Farewell; for I must leave you:
It seems not meet nor wholesome to my place
To be produc'd,--as if I stay I shall,--
Against the Moor: for I do know the state,--
However this may gall him with some check,--
Cannot with safety cast him; for he's embark'd
With such loud reason to the Cyprus wars,--
Which even now stand in act,--that, for their souls,
Another of his fathom they have none
To lead their business: in which regard,
Though I do hate him as I do hell pains,
Yet, for necessity of present life,
I must show out a flag and sign of love,
Which is indeed but sign. That you shall surely find him,
Lead to the Sagittary the raised search;
And there will I be with him. So, farewell.

[Exit.]

[Enter, below, Brabantio, and Servants with torches.]

BRABANTIO.
It is too true an evil: gone she is;
And what's to come of my despised time
Is naught but bitterness.--Now, Roderigo,
Where didst thou see her?--O unhappy girl!--
With the Moor, say'st thou?--Who would be a father!
How didst thou know 'twas she?--O, she deceives me
Past thought.--What said she to you?--Get more tapers;
Raise all my kindred.--Are they married, think you?

RODERIGO.
Truly, I think they are.

BRABANTIO.
O heaven!--How got she out?--O treason of the blood!--
Fathers, from hence trust not your daughters' minds
By what you see them act.--Are there not charms
By which the property of youth and maidhood
May be abused? Have you not read, Roderigo,
Of some such thing?

RODERIGO.
Yes, sir, I have indeed.

BRABANTIO.
Call up my brother.--O, would you had had her!--
Some one way, some another.--Do you know
Where we may apprehend her and the Moor?

RODERIGO.
I think I can discover him, if you please
To get good guard, and go along with me.

BRABANTIO.
Pray you, lead on. At every house I'll call;
I may command at most.--Get weapons, ho!
And raise some special officers of night.--
On, good Roderigo:--I'll deserve your pains.

[Exeunt.]



SCENE II. Venice. Another street.

[Enter Othello, Iago, and Attendants with torches.]

IAGO.
Though in the trade of war I have slain men,
Yet do I hold it very stuff o' the conscience
To do no contriv'd murder: I lack iniquity
Sometimes to do me service: nine or ten times
I had thought to have yerk'd him here under the ribs.

OTHELLO.
'Tis better as it is.

IAGO.
Nay, but he prated,
And spoke such scurvy and provoking terms
Against your honor,
That, with the little godliness I have,
I did full hard forbear him. But, I pray you, sir,
Are you fast married? Be assured of this,
That the magnifico is much beloved;
And hath, in his effect, a voice potential
As double as the duke's: he will divorce you;
Or put upon you what restraint and grievance
The law,--with all his might to enforce it on,--
Will give him cable.

OTHELLO.
Let him do his spite:
My services which I have done the signiory
Shall out-tongue his complaints. 'Tis yet to know,--
Which, when I know that boasting is an honor,
I shall promulgate,--I fetch my life and being
From men of royal siege; and my demerits
May speak unbonneted to as proud a fortune
As this that I have reach'd: for know, Iago,
But that I love the gentle Desdemona,
I would not my unhoused free condition
Put into circumscription and confine
For the sea's worth. But, look! what lights come yond?

IAGO.
Those are the raised father and his friends:
You were best go in.

OTHELLO.
Not I; I must be found;
My parts, my title, and my perfect soul
Shall manifest me rightly. Is it they?

IAGO.
By Janus, I think no.

[Enter Cassio and certain Officers with torches.]

OTHELLO.
The servants of the duke and my lieutenant.--
The goodness of the night upon you, friends!
What is the news?

CASSIO.
The duke does greet you, general;
And he requires your haste-post-haste appearance
Even on the instant.

OTHELLO.
What is the matter, think you?

CASSIO.
Something from Cyprus, as I may divine:
It is a business of some heat: the galleys
Have sent a dozen sequent messengers
This very night at one another's heels;
And many of the consuls, rais'd and met,
Are at the duke's already: you have been hotly call'd for;
When, being not at your lodging to be found,
The senate hath sent about three several quests
To search you out.

OTHELLO.
'Tis well I am found by you.
I will but spend a word here in the house,
And go with you.

[Exit.]

CASSIO.
Ancient, what makes he here?

IAGO.
Faith, he to-night hath boarded a land carack:
If it prove lawful prize, he's made forever.

CASSIO.
I do not understand.

IAGO.
He's married.

CASSIO.
To who?

[Re-enter Othello.]

IAGO.
Marry, to--Come, captain, will you go?

OTHELLO.
Have with you.

CASSIO.
Here comes another troop to seek for you.

IAGO.
It is Brabantio.--General, be advis'd;
He comes to bad intent.

[Enter Brabantio, Roderigo, and Officers with torches and
weapons.]

OTHELLO.
Holla! stand there!

RODERIGO.
Signior, it is the Moor.

BRABANTIO.
Down with him, thief!

[They draw on both sides.]

IAGO.
You, Roderigo! come, sir, I am for you.

OTHELLO.
Keep up your bright swords, for the dew will rust them.--
Good signior, you shall more command with years
Than with your weapons.

BRABANTIO.
O thou foul thief, where hast thou stow'd my daughter?
Damn'd as thou art, thou hast enchanted her;
For I'll refer me to all things of sense,
If she in chains of magic were not bound,
Whether a maid so tender, fair, and happy,
So opposite to marriage that she shunn'd
The wealthy curled darlings of our nation,
Would ever have, to incur a general mock,
Run from her guardage to the sooty bosom
Of such a thing as thou,--to fear, not to delight.
Judge me the world, if 'tis not gross in sense
That thou hast practis'd on her with foul charms;
Abus'd her delicate youth with drugs or minerals
That weaken motion:--I'll have't disputed on;
'Tis probable, and palpable to thinking.
I therefore apprehend and do attach thee
For an abuser of the world, a practiser
Of arts inhibited and out of warrant.--
Lay hold upon him: if he do resist,
Subdue him at his peril.

OTHELLO.
Hold your hands,
Both you of my inclining and the rest:
Were it my cue to fight, I should have known it
Without a prompter.--Where will you that I go
To answer this your charge?

BRABANTIO.
To prison; till fit time
Of law and course of direct session
Call thee to answer.

OTHELLO.
What if I do obey?
How may the duke be therewith satisfied,
Whose messengers are here about my side,
Upon some present business of the state,
To bring me to him?

FIRST OFFICER.
'Tis true, most worthy signior;
The duke's in council, and your noble self,
I am sure, is sent for.

BRABANTIO.
How! the duke in council!
In this time of the night!--Bring him away:
Mine's not an idle cause: the duke himself,
Or any of my brothers of the state,
Cannot but feel this wrong as 'twere their own;
For if such actions may have passage free,
Bond slaves and pagans shall our statesmen be.

[Exeunt.]



SCENE III. Venice. A council chamber.

[The Duke and Senators sitting at a table; Officers attending.]

DUKE.
There is no composition in these news
That gives them credit.

FIRST SENATOR.
Indeed, they are disproportion'd;
My letters say a hundred and seven galleys.

DUKE.
And mine a hundred and forty.

SECOND SENATOR.
And mine two hundred:
But though they jump not on a just account,--
As in these cases, where the aim reports,
'Tis oft with difference,--yet do they all confirm
A Turkish fleet, and bearing up to Cyprus.

DUKE.
Nay, it is possible enough to judgement:
I do not so secure me in the error,
But the main article I do approve
In fearful sense.

SAILOR.
[Within.] What, ho! what, ho! what, ho!

FIRST OFFICER.
A messenger from the galleys.

[Enter a Sailor.]

DUKE.
Now,--what's the business?

SAILOR.
The Turkish preparation makes for Rhodes;
So was I bid report here to the state
By Signior Angelo.

DUKE.
How say you by this change?

FIRST SENATOR.
This cannot be,
By no assay of reason: 'tis a pageant
To keep us in false gaze. When we consider
The importancy of Cyprus to the Turk;
And let ourselves again but understand
That, as it more concerns the Turk than Rhodes,
So may he with more facile question bear it,
For that it stands not in such warlike brace,
But altogether lacks the abilities
That Rhodes is dress'd in. If we make thought of this,
We must not think the Turk is so unskilful
To leave that latest which concerns him first;
Neglecting an attempt of ease and gain,
To wake and wage a danger profitless.

DUKE.
Nay, in all confidence, he's not for Rhodes.

FIRST OFFICER.
Here is more news.

[Enter a Messenger.]

MESSENGER.
The Ottomites, reverend and gracious,
Steering with due course toward the isle of Rhodes,
Have there injointed them with an after fleet.

FIRST SENATOR.
Ay, so I thought.--How many, as you guess?

MESSENGER.
Of thirty sail: and now they do re-stem
Their backward course, bearing with frank appearance
Their purposes toward Cyprus.--Signior Montano,
Your trusty and most valiant servitor,
With his free duty recommends you thus,
And prays you to believe him.

DUKE.
'Tis certain, then, for Cyprus.--
Marcus Luccicos, is not he in town?

FIRST SENATOR.
He's now in Florence.

DUKE.
Write from us to him; post-post-haste despatch.

FIRST SENATOR.
Here comes Brabantio and the valiant Moor.

[Enter Brabantio, Othello, Iago, Roderigo, and Officers.]

DUKE.
Valiant Othello, we must straight employ you
Against the general enemy Ottoman.--
[To Brabantio.] I did not see you; welcome, gentle signior;
We lack'd your counsel and your help to-night.

BRABANTIO.
So did I yours. Good your grace, pardon me;
Neither my place, nor aught I heard of business
Hath rais'd me from my bed; nor doth the general care
Take hold on me; for my particular grief
Is of so flood-gate and o'erbearing nature
That it engluts and swallows other sorrows,
And it is still itself.

DUKE.
Why, what's the matter?

BRABANTIO.
My daughter! O, my daughter!

DUKE and SENATORS.
Dead?

BRABANTIO.
Ay, to me;
She is abused, stol'n from me, and corrupted
By spells and medicines bought of mountebanks;
For nature so preposterously to err,
Being not deficient, blind, or lame of sense,
Sans witchcraft could not.

DUKE.
Whoe'er he be that, in this foul proceeding,
Hath thus beguiled your daughter of herself,
And you of her, the bloody book of law
You shall yourself read in the bitter letter
After your own sense; yea, though our proper son
Stood in your action.

BRABANTIO.
Humbly I thank your grace.
Here is the man, this Moor; whom now, it seems,
Your special mandate for the state affairs
Hath hither brought.

DUKE and SENATORS.
We are very sorry for't.

DUKE.
[To Othello.] What, in your own part, can you say to this?

BRABANTIO.
Nothing, but this is so.

OTHELLO.
Most potent, grave, and reverend signiors,
My very noble and approv'd good masters,--
That I have ta'en away this old man's daughter,
It is most true; true, I have married her:
The very head and front of my offending
Hath this extent, no more. Rude am I in my speech,
And little bless'd with the soft phrase of peace;
For since these arms of mine had seven years' pith,
Till now some nine moons wasted, they have us'd
Their dearest action in the tented field;
And little of this great world can I speak,
More than pertains to feats of broil and battle;
And therefore little shall I grace my cause
In speaking for myself. Yet, by your gracious patience,
I will a round unvarnish'd tale deliver
Of my whole course of love: what drugs, what charms,
What conjuration, and what mighty magic,--
For such proceeding I am charged withal,--
I won his daughter.

BRABANTIO.
A maiden never bold:
Of spirit so still and quiet that her motion
Blush'd at herself; and she,--in spite of nature,
Of years, of country, credit, everything,--
To fall in love with what she fear'd to look on!
It is judgement maim'd and most imperfect
That will confess perfection so could err
Against all rules of nature; and must be driven
To find out practices of cunning hell,
Why this should be. I therefore vouch again,
That with some mixtures powerful o'er the blood,
Or with some dram conjur'd to this effect,
He wrought upon her.

DUKE.
To vouch this is no proof;
Without more wider and more overt test
Than these thin habits and poor likelihoods
Of modern seeming do prefer against him.

FIRST SENATOR.
But, Othello, speak:
Did you by indirect and forced courses
Subdue and poison this young maid's affections?
Or came it by request, and such fair question
As soul to soul affordeth?

OTHELLO.
I do beseech you,
Send for the lady to the Sagittary,
And let her speak of me before her father.
If you do find me foul in her report,
The trust, the office I do hold of you,
Not only take away, but let your sentence
Even fall upon my life.

DUKE.
Fetch Desdemona hither.

OTHELLO.
Ancient, conduct them; you best know the place.--

[Exeunt Iago and Attendants.]

And, till she come, as truly as to heaven
I do confess the vices of my blood,
So justly to your grave ears I'll present
How I did thrive in this fair lady's love,
And she in mine.

DUKE.
Say it, Othello.

OTHELLO.
Her father lov'd me; oft invited me;
Still question'd me the story of my life,
From year to year,--the battles, sieges, fortunes,
That I have pass'd.
I ran it through, even from my boyish days
To the very moment that he bade me tell it:
Wherein I spake of most disastrous chances,
Of moving accidents by flood and field;
Of hair-breadth scapes i' the imminent deadly breach;
Of being taken by the insolent foe,
And sold to slavery; of my redemption thence,
And portance in my travels' history:
Wherein of antres vast and deserts idle,
Rough quarries, rocks, and hills whose heads touch heaven,
It was my hint to speak,--such was the process;
And of the Cannibals that each other eat,
The Anthropophagi, and men whose heads
Do grow beneath their shoulders. This to hear
Would Desdemona seriously incline:
But still the house affairs would draw her thence;
Which ever as she could with haste despatch,
She'd come again, and with a greedy ear
Devour up my discourse; which I observing,
Took once a pliant hour; and found good means
To draw from her a prayer of earnest heart
That I would all my pilgrimage dilate,
Whereof by parcels she had something heard,
But not intentively; I did consent;
And often did beguile her of her tears,
When I did speak of some distressful stroke
That my youth suffer'd. My story being done,
She gave me for my pains a world of sighs:
She swore,--in faith, 'twas strange, 'twas passing strange;
'Twas pitiful, 'twas wondrous pitiful:
She wish'd she had not heard it, yet she wish'd
That heaven had made her such a man: she thank'd me;
And bade me, if I had a friend that lov'd her,
I should but teach him how to tell my story,
And that would woo her. Upon this hint I spake:
She lov'd me for the dangers I had pass'd;
And I lov'd her that she did pity them.
This only is the witchcraft I have us'd:--
Here comes the lady; let her witness it.

[Enter Desdemona, Iago, and Attendants.]

DUKE.
I think this tale would win my daughter too.--
Good Brabantio,
Take up this mangled matter at the best.
Men do their broken weapons rather use
Than their bare hands.

BRABANTIO.
I pray you, hear her speak:
If she confess that she was half the wooer,
Destruction on my head, if my bad blame
Light on the man!--Come hither, gentle mistress:
Do you perceive in all this noble company
Where most you owe obedience?

DESDEMONA.
My noble father,
I do perceive here a divided duty:
To you I am bound for life and education;
My life and education both do learn me
How to respect you; you are the lord of duty,--
I am hitherto your daughter: but here's my husband;
And so much duty as my mother show'd
To you, preferring you before her father,
So much I challenge that I may profess
Due to the Moor, my lord.

BRABANTIO.
God be with you!--I have done.--
Please it your grace, on to the state affairs:
I had rather to adopt a child than get it.--
Come hither, Moor:
I here do give thee that with all my heart
Which, but thou hast already, with all my heart
I would keep from thee.--For your sake, jewel,
I am glad at soul I have no other child;
For thy escape would teach me tyranny,
To hang clogs on them.--I have done, my lord.

DUKE.
Let me speak like yourself; and lay a sentence
Which, as a grise or step, may help these lovers
Into your favour.
When remedies are past, the griefs are ended
By seeing the worst, which late on hopes depended.
To mourn a mischief that is past and gone
Is the next way to draw new mischief on.
What cannot be preserved when fortune takes,
Patience her injury a mockery makes.
The robb'd that smiles steals something from the thief;
He robs himself that spends a bootless grief.

BRABANTIO.
So let the Turk of Cyprus us beguile;
We lose it not so long as we can smile;
He bears the sentence well, that nothing bears
But the free comfort which from thence he hears;
But he bears both the sentence and the sorrow
That, to pay grief, must of poor patience borrow.
These sentences, to sugar or to gall,
Being strong on both sides, are equivocal:
But words are words; I never yet did hear
That the bruis'd heart was pierced through the ear.--
I humbly beseech you, proceed to the affairs of state.

DUKE.
The Turk with a most mighty preparation makes for Cyprus.--
Othello, the fortitude of the place is best known to you; and
though we have there a substitute of most allowed sufficiency,
yet opinion, a sovereign mistress of effects, throws a more safer
voice on you: you must therefore be content to slubber the gloss
of your new fortunes with this more stubborn and boisterous
expedition.

OTHELLO.
The tyrant custom, most grave senators,
Hath made the flinty and steel couch of war
My thrice-driven bed of down: I do agnize
A natural and prompt alacrity
I find in hardness; and do undertake
These present wars against the Ottomites.
Most humbly, therefore, bending to your state,
I crave fit disposition for my wife;
Due reference of place and exhibition;
With such accommodation and besort
As levels with her breeding.

DUKE.
If you please,
Be't at her father's.

BRABANTIO.
I'll not have it so.

OTHELLO.
Nor I.

DESDEMONA.
Nor I. I would not there reside,
To put my father in impatient thoughts,
By being in his eye. Most gracious duke,
To my unfolding lend your prosperous ear;
And let me find a charter in your voice
To assist my simpleness.

DUKE.
What would you, Desdemona?

DESDEMONA.
That I did love the Moor to live with him,
My downright violence and storm of fortunes
May trumpet to the world: my heart's subdu'd
Even to the very quality of my lord:
I saw Othello's visage in his mind;
And to his honors and his valiant parts
Did I my soul and fortunes consecrate.
So that, dear lords, if I be left behind,
A moth of peace, and he go to the war,
The rites for which I love him are bereft me,
And I a heavy interim shall support
By his dear absence. Let me go with him.

OTHELLO.
Let her have your voices.
Vouch with me, heaven, I therefore beg it not
To please the palate of my appetite;
Nor to comply with heat,--the young affects
In me defunct,--and proper satisfaction;
But to be free and bounteous to her mind:
And heaven defend your good souls, that you think
I will your serious and great business scant
For she is with me: no, when light-wing'd toys
Of feather'd Cupid seel with wanton dullness
My speculative and offic'd instruments,
That my disports corrupt and taint my business,
Let housewives make a skillet of my helm,
And all indign and base adversities
Make head against my estimation!

DUKE.
Be it as you shall privately determine,
Either for her stay or going: the affair cries haste,
And speed must answer it. 

FIRST SENATOR.
You must away to-night.

OTHELLO.
With all my heart.

DUKE.
At nine i' the morning here we'll meet again.--
Othello, leave some officer behind,
And he shall our commission bring to you;
With such things else of quality and respect
As doth import you.

OTHELLO.
So please your grace, my ancient,--
A man he is of honesty and trust,--
To his conveyance I assign my wife,
With what else needful your good grace shall think
To be sent after me.

DUKE.
Let it be so.--
Good night to everyone.--[To Brabantio.] And, noble signior,
If virtue no delighted beauty lack,
Your son-in-law is far more fair than black.

FIRST SENATOR.
Adieu, brave Moor; use Desdemona well.

BRABANTIO.
Look to her, Moor, if thou hast eyes to see:
She has deceiv'd her father, and may thee.

[Exeunt Duke, Senators, Officers. &c.]

OTHELLO.
My life upon her faith!--Honest Iago,
My Desdemona must I leave to thee:
I pr'ythee, let thy wife attend on her;
And bring them after in the best advantage.--
Come, Desdemona, I have but an hour
Of love, of worldly matters and direction,
To spend with thee: we must obey the time.

[Exeunt Othello and Desdemona.]

RODERIGO.
Iago,--

IAGO.
What say'st thou, noble heart?

RODERIGO.
What will I do, thinkest thou?

IAGO.
Why, go to bed and sleep.

RODERIGO.
I will incontinently drown myself.

IAGO.
If thou dost, I shall never love thee after. Why, thou silly
gentleman!

RODERIGO.
It is silliness to live when to live is torment; and then
have we a prescription to die when death is our physician.

IAGO.
O villainous! I have looked upon the world for four times seven
years, and since I could distinguish betwixt a benefit and an
injury, I never found man that knew how to love himself. Ere I
would say I would drown myself for the love of a Guinea-hen, I
would change my humanity with a baboon.

RODERIGO.
What should I do? I confess it is my shame to be so fond,
but it is not in my virtue to amend it.

IAGO.
Virtue! a fig! 'Tis in ourselves that we are thus or thus.
Our bodies are gardens, to the which our wills are gardeners;
so that if we will plant nettles or sow lettuce, set hyssop and
weed up thyme, supply it with one gender of herbs or distract it
with many, either to have it sterile with idleness or manured
with industry; why, the power and corrigible authority of this
lies in our wills. If the balance of our lives had not one scale
of reason to poise another of sensuality, the blood and baseness
of our natures would conduct us to most preposterous conclusions:
But we have reason to cool our raging motions, our carnal stings,
our unbitted lusts; whereof I take this, that you call love, to
be a sect or scion.

RODERIGO.
It cannot be.

IAGO.
It is merely a lust of the blood and a permission of the will.
Come, be a man: drown thyself! drown cats and blind puppies. I
have professed me thy friend, and I confess me knit to
thy deserving with cables of perdurable toughness; I could
never better stead thee than now. Put money in thy purse; follow
thou the wars; defeat thy favour with an usurped beard; I say,
put money in thy purse. It cannot be that Desdemona should long
continue her love to the Moor,--put money in thy purse,--nor he
his to her: it was a violent commencement, and thou shalt see an
answerable sequestration;--put but money in thy purse.--These
Moors are changeable in their wills:--fill thy purse with money:
the food that to him now is as luscious as locusts shall be to
him shortly as acerb as the coloquintida. She must change for
youth: when she is sated with his body, she will find the error
of her choice: she must have change, she must: therefore put
money in thy purse.--If thou wilt needs damn thyself, do it a
more delicate way than drowning. Make all the money thou canst;
if sanctimony and a frail vow betwixt an erring barbarian and a
supersubtle Venetian be not too hard for my wits and all the
tribe of hell, thou shalt enjoy her; therefore make money. A pox
of drowning thyself! it is clean out of the way: seek thou rather
to be hanged in compassing thy joy than to be drowned and go
without her.

RODERIGO.
Wilt thou be fast to my hopes, if I depend on the issue?

IAGO.
Thou art sure of me:--go, make money:--I have told thee
often, and I re-tell thee again and again, I hate the Moor: my
cause is hearted; thine hath no less reason. Let us be
conjunctive in our revenge against him: if thou canst cuckold
him, thou dost thyself a pleasure, me a sport. There are many
events in the womb of time which will be delivered. Traverse; go;
provide thy money. We will have more of this to-morrow. Adieu.

RODERIGO.
Where shall we meet i' the morning?

IAGO.
At my lodging.

RODERIGO.
I'll be with thee betimes.

IAGO.
Go to; farewell. Do you hear, Roderigo?

RODERIGO.
What say you?

IAGO.
No more of drowning, do you hear?

RODERIGO.
I am changed: I'll go sell all my land.

[Exit.]

IAGO.
Thus do I ever make my fool my purse;
For I mine own gain'd knowledge should profane
If I would time expend with such a snipe
But for my sport and profit. I hate the Moor;
And it is thought abroad that 'twixt my sheets
He has done my office: I know not if't be true;
But I, for mere suspicion in that kind,
Will do as if for surety. He holds me well,
The better shall my purpose work on him.
Cassio's a proper man: let me see now;
To get his place, and to plume up my will
In double knavery,--How, how?--Let's see:--
After some time, to abuse Othello's ear
That he is too familiar with his wife:--
He hath a person, and a smooth dispose,
To be suspected; fram'd to make women false.
The Moor is of a free and open nature,
That thinks men honest that but seem to be so;
And will as tenderly be led by the nose
As asses are.
I have't;--it is engender'd:--hell and night
Must bring this monstrous birth to the world's light.

[Exit.]



ACT II.

SCENE I. A seaport in Cyprus. A Platform.

[Enter Montano and two Gentlemen.]

MONTANO.
What from the cape can you discern at sea?

FIRST GENTLEMAN.
Nothing at all: it is a high-wrought flood;
I cannot, 'twixt the heaven and the main,
Descry a sail.

MONTANO.
Methinks the wind hath spoke aloud at land;
A fuller blast ne'er shook our battlements:
If it hath ruffian'd so upon the sea,
What ribs of oak, when mountains melt on them,
Can hold the mortise? What shall we hear of this?

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
A segregation of the Turkish fleet:
For do but stand upon the foaming shore,
The chidden billow seems to pelt the clouds;
The wind-shak'd surge, with high and monstrous main,
Seems to cast water on the burning Bear,
And quench the guards of the ever-fixed pole;
I never did like molestation view
On the enchafed flood.

MONTANO.
If that the Turkish fleet
Be not enshelter'd and embay'd, they are drown'd;
It is impossible to bear it out.

[Enter a third Gentleman.]

THIRD GENTLEMAN.
News, lads! our wars are done.
The desperate tempest hath so bang'd the Turks
That their designment halts; a noble ship of Venice
Hath seen a grievous wreck and sufferance
On most part of their fleet.

MONTANO.
How! is this true?

THIRD GENTLEMAN.
The ship is here put in,
A Veronessa; Michael Cassio,
Lieutenant to the warlike Moor Othello,
Is come on shore: the Moor himself's at sea,
And is in full commission here for Cyprus.

MONTANO.
I am glad on't; 'tis a worthy governor.

THIRD GENTLEMAN.
But this same Cassio,--though he speak of comfort
Touching the Turkish loss,--yet he looks sadly,
And prays the Moor be safe; for they were parted
With foul and violent tempest.

MONTANO.
Pray heavens he be;
For I have serv'd him, and the man commands
Like a full soldier. Let's to the sea-side, ho!
As well to see the vessel that's come in
As to throw out our eyes for brave Othello,
Even till we make the main and the aerial blue
An indistinct regard.

THIRD GENTLEMAN.
Come, let's do so;
For every minute is expectancy
Of more arrivance.

[Enter Cassio.]

CASSIO.
Thanks you, the valiant of this warlike isle,
That so approve the Moor! O, let the heavens
Give him defence against the elements,
For I have lost him on a dangerous sea!

MONTANO.
Is he well shipp'd?

CASSIO.
His bark is stoutly timber'd, and his pilot
Of very expert and approv'd allowance;
Therefore my hopes, not surfeited to death,
Stand in bold cure.

[Within.] A sail, a sail, a sail!

[Enter a fourth Gentleman.]

CASSIO.
What noise?

FOURTH GENTLEMAN.
The town is empty; on the brow o' the sea
Stand ranks of people, and they cry, "A sail!"

CASSIO.
My hopes do shape him for the governor.

[Guns within.]

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
They do discharge their shot of courtesy:
Our friends at least.

CASSIO.
I pray you, sir, go forth,
And give us truth who 'tis that is arriv'd.

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
I shall.

[Exit.]

MONTANO.
But, good lieutenant, is your general wiv'd?

CASSIO.
Most fortunately: he hath achiev'd a maid
That paragons description and wild fame,
One that excels the quirks of blazoning pens,
And in the essential vesture of creation
Does tire the ingener.--

[Re-enter second Gentleman.]

How now! who has put in?

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
'Tis one Iago, ancient to the general.

CASSIO.
He has had most favourable and happy speed:
Tempests themselves, high seas, and howling winds,
The gutter'd rocks, and congregated sands,--
Traitors ensteep'd to clog the guiltless keel,--
As having sense of beauty, do omit
Their mortal natures, letting go safely by
The divine Desdemona.

MONTANO.
What is she?

CASSIO.
She that I spake of, our great captain's captain,
Left in the conduct of the bold Iago;
Whose footing here anticipates our thoughts
A se'nnight's speed.--Great Jove, Othello guard,
And swell his sail with thine own powerful breath,
That he may bless this bay with his tall ship,
Make love's quick pants in Desdemona's arms,
Give renew'd fire to our extincted spirits,
And bring all Cyprus comfort! O, behold,

[Enter Desdemona, Emilia, Iago, Roderigo, and Attendants.]

The riches of the ship is come on shore!
Ye men of Cyprus, let her have your knees.--
Hall to thee, lady! and the grace of heaven,
Before, behind thee, and on every hand,
Enwheel thee round!

DESDEMONA.
I thank you, valiant Cassio.
What tidings can you tell me of my lord?

CASSIO.
He is not yet arrived nor know I aught
But that he's well, and will be shortly here.

DESDEMONA.
O, but I fear--How lost you company?

CASSIO.
The great contention of the sea and skies
Parted our fellowship:--but, hark! a sail.

[Within.] A sail, a sail!

[Guns within.]

SECOND GENTLEMAN.
They give their greeting to the citadel:
This likewise is a friend.

CASSIO.
See for the news.

[Exit Gentleman.]

Good ancient, you are welcome:--[To Emilia.] Welcome, mistress:--
Let it not gall your patience, good Iago,
That I extend my manners; 'tis my breeding
That gives me this bold show of courtesy.

[Kissing her.]

IAGO.
Sir, would she give you so much of her lips
As of her tongue she oft bestows on me,
You'd have enough.

DESDEMONA.
Alas, she has no speech.

IAGO.
In faith, too much;
I find it still when I have list to sleep:
Marry, before your ladyship, I grant,
She puts her tongue a little in her heart,
And chides with thinking.

EMILIA.
You have little cause to say so.

IAGO.
Come on, come on; you are pictures out of doors,
Bells in your parlours, wild cats in your kitchens,
Saints in your injuries, devils being offended,
Players in your housewifery, and housewives in your beds.

DESDEMONA.
O, fie upon thee, slanderer!

IAGO.
Nay, it is true, or else I am a Turk:
You rise to play, and go to bed to work.

EMILIA.
You shall not write my praise.

IAGO.
No, let me not.

DESDEMONA.
What wouldst thou write of me, if thou shouldst praise me?

IAGO.
O gentle lady, do not put me to't;
For I am nothing if not critical.

DESDEMONA.
Come on, assay--There's one gone to the harbor?

IAGO.
Ay, madam.

DESDEMONA.
I am not merry; but I do beguile
The thing I am, by seeming otherwise.--
Come, how wouldst thou praise me?

IAGO.
I am about it; but, indeed, my invention
Comes from my pate as birdlime does from frize,--
It plucks out brains and all: but my Muse labours,
And thus she is deliver'd.
If she be fair and wise,--fairness and wit,
The one's for use, the other useth it.

DESDEMONA.
Well prais'd! How if she be black and witty?

IAGO.
If she be black, and thereto have a wit,
She'll find a white that shall her blackness fit.

DESDEMONA.
Worse and worse.

EMILIA.
How if fair and foolish?

IAGO.
She never yet was foolish that was fair;
For even her folly help'd her to an heir.

DESDEMONA.
These are old fond paradoxes to make fools laugh i' the
alehouse. What miserable praise hast thou for her that's foul
and foolish?

IAGO.
There's none so foul and foolish thereunto,
But does foul pranks which fair and wise ones do.

DESDEMONA.
O heavy ignorance!--thou praisest the worst best. But what
praise couldst thou bestow on a deserving woman indeed,--one
that, in the authority of her merit, did justly put on the vouch
of very malice itself?

IAGO.
She that was ever fair and never proud;
Had tongue at will and yet was never loud;
Never lack'd gold and yet went never gay;
Fled from her wish, and yet said, "Now I may";
She that, being anger'd, her revenge being nigh,
Bade her wrong stay and her displeasure fly;
She that in wisdom never was so frail
To change the cod's head for the salmon's tail;
She that could think and ne'er disclose her mind;
See suitors following and not look behind;
She was a wight, if ever such wight were;--

DESDEMONA.
To do what?

IAGO.
To suckle fools and chronicle small beer.

DESDEMONA.
O most lame and impotent conclusion!--Do not learn of him,
Emilia, though he be thy husband.--How say you, Cassio? is he
not a most profane and liberal counsellor?

CASSIO.
He speaks home, madam: you may relish him more in the
soldier than in the scholar.

IAGO.
[Aside.] He takes her by the palm: ay, well said, whisper:
with as little a web as this will I ensnare as great a fly as
Cassio. Ay, smile upon her, do; I will gyve thee in thine own
courtship. You say true; 'tis so, indeed: if such tricks as
these strip you out of your lieutenantry, it had been better you
had not kissed your three fingers so oft, which now again you are
most apt to play the sir in. Very good; well kissed! an excellent
courtesy! 'tis so, indeed. Yet again your fingers to your lips?
Would they were clyster-pipes for your sake!

[Trumpet within.]--The Moor! I know his trumpet.

CASSIO.
'Tis truly so.

DESDEMONA.
Let's meet him, and receive him.

CASSIO.
Lo, where he comes!

[Enter Othello and Attendants.]

OTHELLO.
O my fair warrior!

DESDEMONA.
My dear Othello!

OTHELLO.
It gives me wonder great as my content
To see you here before me. O my soul's joy!
If after every tempest come such calms,
May the winds blow till they have waken'd death!
And let the laboring bark climb hills of seas
Olympus-high, and duck again as low
As hell's from heaven! If it were now to die,
'Twere now to be most happy; for, I fear,
My soul hath her content so absolute
That not another comfort like to this
Succeeds in unknown fate.

DESDEMONA.
The heavens forbid
But that our loves and comforts should increase
Even as our days do grow!

OTHELLO.
Amen to that, sweet powers!--
I cannot speak enough of this content;
It stops me here; it is too much of joy:
And this, and this, the greatest discords be

[Kissing her.]

That e'er our hearts shall make!

IAGO.
[Aside.] O, you are well tun'd now!
But I'll set down the pegs that make this music,
As honest as I am.

OTHELLO.
Come, let us to the castle.--
News, friends; our wars are done, the Turks are drown'd.
How does my old acquaintance of this isle?
Honey, you shall be well desir'd in Cyprus;
I have found great love amongst them. O my sweet,
I prattle out of fashion, and I dote
In mine own comforts.--I pry'thee, good Iago,
Go to the bay and disembark my coffers:
Bring thou the master to the citadel;
He is a good one, and his worthiness
Does challenge much respect.--Come, Desdemona,
Once more well met at Cyprus.

[Exeunt Othello, Desdemona, and Attendants.]

IAGO.
Do thou meet me presently at the harbour. Come hither. If thou
be'st valiant,--as, they say, base men being in love have then a
nobility in their natures more than is native to them,--list me.
The lieutenant to-night watches on the court of guard: first, I
must tell thee this--Desdemona is directly in love with him.

RODERIGO.
With him! why, 'tis not possible.

IAGO.
Lay thy finger thus, and let thy soul be instructed. Mark me
with what violence she first loved the Moor, but for bragging,
and telling her fantastical lies: and will she love him still for
prating? Let not thy discreet heart think it. Her eye must be
fed; and what delight shall she have to look on the devil? When
the blood is made dull with the act of sport, there should
be,--again to inflame it and to give satiety a fresh appetite,--
loveliness in favour; sympathy in years, manners, and beauties;
all which the Moor is defective in: now, for want of these
required conveniences, her delicate tenderness will find itself
abused, begin to heave the gorge, disrelish and abhor the Moor;
very nature will instruct her in it, and compel her to some
second choice. Now sir, this granted;--as it is a most pregnant
and unforced position,--who stands so eminently in the degree of
this fortune as Cassio does? a knave very voluble; no further
conscionable than in putting on the mere form of civil and
humane seeming, for the better compass of his salt and most
hidden loose affection? why, none; why, none;--a slipper and
subtle knave; a finder out of occasions; that has an eye can
stamp and counterfeit advantages, though true advantage never
present itself: a devilish knave! besides, the knave is
handsome, young, and hath all those requisites in him that folly
and green minds look after: a pestilent complete knave; and the
woman hath found him already.

RODERIGO.
I cannot believe that in her; she is full of most blessed
condition.

IAGO.
Blest fig's end! the wine she drinks is made of grapes: if
she had been blessed, she would never have loved the Moor:
blessed pudding! Didst thou not see her paddle with the palm of
his hand? didst not mark that?

RODERIGO.
Yes, that I did; but that was but courtesy.

IAGO.
Lechery, by this hand; an index and obscure prologue to the
history of lust and foul thoughts. They met so near with their
lips that their breaths embraced together. Villainous thoughts,
Roderigo! when these mutualities so marshal the way, hard at
hand comes the master and main exercise, the incorporate
conclusion: pish!--But, sir, be you ruled by me: I have brought
you from Venice. Watch you to-night: for the command, I'll lay't
upon you: Cassio knows you not:--I'll not be far from you: do you
find some occasion to anger Cassio, either by speaking too loud,
or tainting his discipline, or from what other course you
please, which the time shall more favourably minister.

RODERIGO.
Well.

IAGO.
Sir, he is rash, and very sudden in choler, and haply with his
truncheon may strike at you: provoke him, that he may; for even
out of that will I cause these of Cyprus to mutiny, whose
qualification shall come into no true taste again but by the
displanting of Cassio. So shall you have a shorter journey to
your desires by the means I shall then have to prefer them; and
the impediment most profitably removed, without the which there
were no expectation of our prosperity.

RODERIGO.
I will do this, if I can bring it to any opportunity.

IAGO.
I warrant thee. Meet me by and by at the citadel: I must
fetch his necessaries ashore. Farewell.

RODERIGO.
Adieu.

[Exit.]

IAGO.
That Cassio loves her, I do well believe it;
That she loves him, 'tis apt, and of great credit:
The Moor,--howbeit that I endure him not,--
Is of a constant, loving, noble nature;
And, I dare think, he'll prove to Desdemona
A most dear husband. Now, I do love her too;
Not out of absolute lust,--though, peradventure,
I stand accountant for as great a sin,--
But partly led to diet my revenge,
For that I do suspect the lusty Moor
Hath leap'd into my seat: the thought whereof
Doth, like a poisonous mineral, gnaw my inwards;
And nothing can or shall content my soul
Till I am even'd with him, wife for wife;
Or, failing so, yet that I put the Moor
At least into a jealousy so strong
That judgement cannot cure. Which thing to do,--
If this poor trash of Venice, whom I trash
For his quick hunting, stand the putting on,
I'll have our Michael Cassio on the hip;
Abuse him to the Moor in the rank garb,--
For I fear Cassio with my night-cap too;--
Make the Moor thank me, love me, and reward me
For making him egregiously an ass
And practicing upon his peace and quiet
Even to madness. 'Tis here, but yet confus'd:
Knavery's plain face is never seen till us'd.

[Exit.]



SCENE II. A street.

[Enter a Herald with a proclamation; People following.]

HERALD.
It is Othello's pleasure, our noble and valiant general,
that upon certain tidings now arrived, importing the mere
perdition of the Turkish fleet, every man put himself into
triumph; some to dance, some to make bonfires, each man to
what sport and revels his addiction leads him: for, besides these
beneficial news, it is the celebration of his nuptial:--so
much was his pleasure should be proclaimed. All offices are open;
and there is full liberty of feasting from this present hour of
five till the bell have told eleven. Heaven bless the isle of
Cyprus and our noble general Othello!

[Exeunt.]



SCENE III. A Hall in the Castle.

[Enter Othello, Desdemona, Cassio, and Attendants.]

OTHELLO.
Good Michael, look you to the guard to-night:
Let's teach ourselves that honourable stop,
Not to out-sport discretion.

CASSIO.
Iago hath direction what to do;
But, notwithstanding, with my personal eye
Will I look to't.

OTHELLO.
Iago is most honest.
Michael, good night: to-morrow with your earliest
Let me have speech with you.--[To Desdemona] Come, my dear love,--
The purchase made, the fruits are to ensue;
That profit's yet to come 'tween me and you.--
Good-night.

[Exeunt Othello, Desdemona, and Attendants.]

[Enter Iago.]

CASSIO.
Welcome, Iago; we must to the watch.

IAGO.
Not this hour, lieutenant; 'tis not yet ten o' the clock.
Our general cast us thus early for the love of his Desdemona; who
let us not therefore blame: he hath not yet made wanton the night
with her; and she is sport for Jove.

CASSIO.
She's a most exquisite lady.

IAGO.
And, I'll warrant her, full of game.

CASSIO.
Indeed, she is a most fresh and delicate creature.

IAGO.
What an eye she has! methinks it sounds a parley to provocation.

CASSIO.
An inviting eye; and yet methinks right modest.

IAGO.
And when she speaks, is it not an alarm to love?

CASSIO.
She is, indeed, perfection.

IAGO.
Well, happiness to their sheets! Come, lieutenant, I have a
stoup of wine; and here without are a brace of Cyprus gallants
that would fain have a measure to the health of black Othello.

CASSIO.
Not to-night, good Iago: I have very poor and unhappy
brains for drinking: I could well wish courtesy would invent some
other custom of entertainment.

IAGO.
O, they are our friends; but one cup: I'll drink for you.

CASSIO.
I have drunk but one cup to-night, and that was craftily
qualified too, and behold, what innovation it makes here: I am
unfortunate in the infirmity, and dare not task my weakness
with any more.

IAGO.
What, man! 'tis a night of revels: the gallants desire it.

CASSIO.
Where are they?

IAGO.
Here at the door; I pray you, call them in.

CASSIO.
I'll do't; but it dislikes me.

[Exit.]

IAGO.
If I can fasten but one cup upon him,
With that which he hath drunk to-night already,
He'll be as full of quarrel and offense
As my young mistress' dog. Now, my sick fool Roderigo,
Whom love hath turn'd almost the wrong side out,
To Desdemona hath to-night carous'd
Potations pottle-deep; and he's to watch:
Three lads of Cyprus,--noble swelling spirits,
That hold their honours in a wary distance,
The very elements of this warlike isle,--
Have I to-night fluster'd with flowing cups,
And they watch too. Now, 'mongst this flock of drunkards,
Am I to put our Cassio in some action
That may offend the isle:--but here they come:
If consequence do but approve my dream,
My boat sails freely, both with wind and stream.

[Re-enter Cassio; with him Montano and Gentlemen; followed by
Servant with wine.]

CASSIO.
'Fore heaven, they have given me a rouse already.

MONTANO.
Good faith, a little one; not past a pint, as I am a soldier.

IAGO.
Some wine, ho!

[Sings.] 
"And let me the canakin clink, clink;
And let me the canakin clink.
  A soldier's a man;
  O, man's life's but a span;
Why then let a soldier drink."

Some wine, boys!

CASSIO.
'Fore God, an excellent song.

IAGO.
I learned it in England, where, indeed, they are most
potent in potting: your Dane, your German, and your swag-bellied
Hollander,--Drink, ho!--are nothing to your English.

CASSIO.
Is your Englishman so expert in his drinking?

IAGO.
Why, he drinks you, with facility, your Dane dead drunk; he
sweats not to overthrow your Almain; he gives your Hollander
a vomit ere the next pottle can be filled.

CASSIO.
To the health of our general!

MONTANO.
I am for it, lieutenant; and I'll do you justice.

IAGO.
O sweet England!

[Sings.]
"King Stephen was and a worthy peer,
  His breeches cost him but a crown;
He held them sixpence all too dear,
  With that he call'd the tailor lown.
He was a wight of high renown,
  And thou art but of low degree:
'Tis pride that pulls the country down;
  Then take thine auld cloak about thee."

Some wine, ho!

CASSIO.
Why, this is a more exquisite song than the other.

IAGO.
Will you hear it again?

CASSIO.
No; for I hold him to be unworthy of his place that does
those things.--Well,--God's above all, and there be souls must
be saved, and there be souls must not be saved.

IAGO.
It's true, good lieutenant.

CASSIO.
For mine own part,--no offence to the general, nor any
man of quality,--I hope to be saved.

IAGO.
And so do I too, lieutenant.

CASSIO.
Ay, but, by your leave, not before me; the lieutenant is to
be saved before the ancient. Let's have no more of this;
let's to our affairs.--Forgive us our sins!--Gentlemen, let's
look to our business. Do not think, gentlemen, I am drunk: this
is my ancient; this is my right hand, and this is my left:--I am
not drunk now; I can stand well enough, and I speak well enough.

ALL.
Excellent well.

CASSIO.
Why, very well then: you must not think, then, that I am drunk.

[Exit.]

MONTANO.
To the platform, masters; come, let's set the watch.

IAGO.
You see this fellow that is gone before;--
He is a soldier fit to stand by Caesar
And give direction: and do but see his vice;
'Tis to his virtue a just equinox,
The one as long as the other: 'tis pity of him.
I fear the trust Othello puts him in,
On some odd time of his infirmity,
Will shake this island.

MONTANO.
But is he often thus?

IAGO.
'Tis evermore the prologue to his sleep:
He'll watch the horologe a double set
If drink rock not his cradle.

MONTANO.
It were well
The general were put in mind of it.
Perhaps he sees it not, or his good nature
Prizes the virtue that appears in Cassio,
And looks not on his evils: is not this true?

[Enter Roderigo.]

IAGO.
[Aside to him.] How now, Roderigo!
I pray you, after the lieutenant; go.

[Exit Roderigo.]

MONTANO.
And 'tis great pity that the noble Moor
Should hazard such a place as his own second
With one of an ingraft infirmity:
It were an honest action to say
So to the Moor.

IAGO.
Not I, for this fair island;
I do love Cassio well; and would do much
To cure him of this evil.--But, hark! What noise?

[Cry within,--"Help! help!"]

[Re-enter Cassio, driving in Roderigo.]

CASSIO.
You rogue! you rascal!

MONTANO.
What's the matter, lieutenant?

CASSIO.
A knave teach me my duty! I'll beat the knave into
a twiggen bottle.

RODERIGO.
Beat me!

CASSIO.
Dost thou prate, rogue? [Striking Roderigo.]

MONTANO.
Nay, good lieutenant; I pray you, sir, hold your hand.

CASSIO.
Let me go, sir, or I'll knock you o'er the mazard.

MONTANO.
Come, come, you're drunk.

CASSIO.
Drunk!

[They fight.]

IAGO.
[Aside to Roderigo.] Away, I say! go out and cry a mutiny.

[Exit Roderigo.] 

Nay, good lieutenant,--alas,, gentlemen:--
Help, ho!--Lieutenant,--sir,--Montano,--sir:--
Help, masters!--Here's a goodly watch indeed!

[Bell rings.]

Who's that that rings the bell?--Diablo, ho!
The town will rise: God's will, lieutenant, hold;
You will be sham'd forever.

[Re-enter Othello and Attendants.]

OTHELLO.
What is the matter here?

MONTANO.
Zounds, I bleed still; I am hurt to the death.

OTHELLO.
Hold, for your lives!

IAGO.
Hold, ho! lieutenant,--sir,--Montano,--gentlemen,--
Have you forgot all sense of place and duty?
Hold! the general speaks to you; hold, hold, for shame!

OTHELLO.
Why, how now, ho! from whence ariseth this?
Are we turn'd Turks, and to ourselves do that
Which Heaven hath forbid the Ottomites?
For Christian shame, put by this barbarous brawl:
He that stirs next to carve for his own rage
Holds his soul light; he dies upon his motion.--
Silence that dreadful bell; it frights the isle
From her propriety.--What is the matter, masters?--
Honest Iago, that look'st dead with grieving,
Speak, who began this? on thy love, I charge thee.

IAGO.
I do not know:--friends all but now, even now,
In quarter, and in terms like bride and groom
Devesting them for bed; and then, but now--
As if some planet had unwitted men,--
Swords out, and tilting one at other's breast
In opposition bloody. I cannot speak
Any beginning to this peevish odds;
And would in action glorious I had lost
Those legs that brought me to a part of it!

OTHELLO.
How comes it, Michael, you are thus forgot?

CASSIO.
I pray you, pardon me; I cannot speak.

OTHELLO.
Worthy Montano, you were wont be civil;
The gravity and stillness of your youth
The world hath noted, and your name is great
In mouths of wisest censure: what's the matter,
That you unlace your reputation thus,
And spend your rich opinion for the name
Of a night-brawler? give me answer to it.

MONTANO.
Worthy Othello, I am hurt to danger:
Your officer, Iago, can inform you,--
While I spare speech, which something now offends me,--
Of all that I do know: nor know I aught
By me that's said or done amiss this night:
Unless self-charity be sometimes a vice,
And to defend ourselves it be a sin
When violence assails us.

OTHELLO.
Now, by heaven,
My blood begins my safer guides to rule;
And passion, having my best judgement collied,
Assays to lead the way. If I once stir,
Or do but lift this arm, the best of you
Shall sink in my rebuke. Give me to know
How this foul rout began, who set it on;
And he that is approv'd in this offense,
Though he had twinn'd with me, both at a birth,
Shall lose me.--What! in a town of war
Yet wild, the people's hearts brimful of fear,
To manage private and domestic quarrel,
In night, and on the court and guard of safety!
'Tis monstrous.--Iago, who began't?

MONTANO.
If partially affin'd, or leagu'd in office,
Thou dost deliver more or less than truth,
Thou art no soldier.

IAGO.
Touch me not so near:
I had rather have this tongue cut from my mouth
Than it should do offence to Michael Cassio;
Yet, I persuade myself, to speak the truth
Shall nothing wrong him.--Thus it is, general.
Montano and myself being in speech,
There comes a fellow crying out for help;
And Cassio following him with determin'd sword,
To execute upon him. Sir, this gentleman
Steps in to Cassio and entreats his pause:
Myself the crying fellow did pursue,
Lest by his clamour,--as it so fell out,--
The town might fall in fright: he, swift of foot,
Outran my purpose; and I return'd the rather
For that I heard the clink and fall of swords,
And Cassio high in oath; which till to-night
I ne'er might say before. When I came back,--
For this was brief,--I found them close together,
At blow and thrust; even as again they were
When you yourself did part them.
More of this matter cannot I report;--
But men are men; the best sometimes forget:--
Though Cassio did some little wrong to him,--
As men in rage strike those that wish them best,--
Yet surely Cassio, I believe, receiv'd
From him that fled some strange indignity,
Which patience could not pass.

OTHELLO.
I know, Iago,
Thy honesty and love doth mince this matter,
Making it light to Cassio. Cassio, I love thee;
But never more be officer of mine.--

[Re-enter Desdemona, attended.]

Look, if my gentle love be not rais'd up!--
I'll make thee an example.

DESDEMONA.
What's the matter?

OTHELLO.
All's well now, sweeting; come away to bed.
[To Montano, who is led off.]
Sir, for your hurts, myself will be your surgeon:
Lead him off.
Iago, look with care about the town,
And silence those whom this vile brawl distracted.--
Come, Desdemona: 'tis the soldiers' life
To have their balmy slumbers wak'd with strife.

[Exeunt all but Iago and Cassio.]

IAGO.
What, are you hurt, lieutenant?

CASSIO.
Ay, past all surgery.

IAGO.
Marry, heaven forbid!

CASSIO.
Reputation, reputation, reputation! O, I have lost my
reputation! I have lost the immortal part of myself, and what
remains is bestial.--My reputation, Iago, my reputation!

IAGO.
As I am an honest man, I thought you had received some 
bodily wound; there is more sense in that than in reputation.
Reputation is an idle and most false imposition; oft got without
merit and lost without deserving: you have lost no reputation at
all, unless you repute yourself such a loser. What, man! there
are ways to recover the general again: you are but now cast in
his mood, a punishment more in policy than in malice; even so as
one would beat his offenceless dog to affright an imperious lion:
sue to him again, and he is yours.

CASSIO.
I will rather sue to be despised than to deceive so good a
commander with so slight, so drunken, and so indiscreet an
officer. Drunk? and speak parrot? and squabble? swagger?
swear? and discourse fustian with one's own shadow?--O thou
invisible spirit of wine, if thou hast no name to be known by,
let us call thee devil!

IAGO.
What was he that you followed with your sword? What had he done
to you?

CASSIO.
I know not.

IAGO.
Is't possible?

CASSIO.
I remember a mass of things, but nothing distinctly; a quarrel,
but nothing wherefore.--O God, that men should put an enemy in
their mouths to steal away their brains! that we should, with
joy, pleasance, revel, and applause, transform ourselves into
beasts!

IAGO.
Why, but you are now well enough: how came you thus recovered?

CASSIO.
It hath pleased the devil drunkenness to give place to the
devil wrath: one unperfectness shows me another, to make me
frankly despise myself.

IAGO.
Come, you are too severe a moraler: as the time, the place, and
the condition of this country stands, I could heartily wish
this had not befallen; but since it is as it is, mend it for
your own good.

CASSIO.
I will ask him for my place again;--he shall tell me I am a
drunkard! Had I as many mouths as Hydra, such an answer would
stop them all. To be now a sensible man, by and by a fool,
and presently a beast! O strange!--Every inordinate cup is
unbless'd, and the ingredient is a devil.

IAGO.
Come, come, good wine is a good familiar creature, if it be
well used: exclaim no more against it. And, good lieutenant,
I think you think I love you.

CASSIO.
I have well approved it, sir.--I drunk!

IAGO.
You, or any man living, may be drunk at a time, man. I'll tell
you what you shall do. Our general's wife is now the general;--
I may say so in this respect, for that he hath devoted and
given up himself to the contemplation, mark, and denotement
of her parts and graces:--confess yourself freely to her;
importune her help to put you in your place again: she is of
so free, so kind, so apt, so blessed a disposition, she holds
it a vice in her goodness not to do more than she is requested:
this broken joint between you and her husband entreat her to
splinter; and, my fortunes against any lay worth naming, this
crack of your love shall grow stronger than it was before.

CASSIO.
You advise me well.

IAGO.
I protest, in the sincerity of love and honest kindness.

CASSIO.
I think it freely; and betimes in the morning I will beseech
the virtuous Desdemona to undertake for me; I am desperate
of my fortunes if they check me here.

IAGO.
You are in the right. Good-night, lieutenant; I must to the
watch.

CASSIO.
Good night, honest Iago.

[Exit.]

IAGO.
And what's he, then, that says I play the villain?
When this advice is free I give and honest,
Probal to thinking, and, indeed, the course
To win the Moor again? For 'tis most easy
The inclining Desdemona to subdue
In any honest suit: she's fram'd as fruitful
As the free elements. And then for her
To win the Moor,--were't to renounce his baptism,
All seals and symbols of redeemed sin,--
His soul is so enfetter'd to her love
That she may make, unmake, do what she list,
Even as her appetite shall play the god
With his weak function. How am I, then, a villain
To counsel Cassio to this parallel course,
Directly to his good? Divinity of hell!
When devils will the blackest sins put on,
They do suggest at first with heavenly shows,
As I do now: for whiles this honest fool
Plies Desdemona to repair his fortune,
And she for him pleads strongly to the Moor,
I'll pour this pestilence into his ear,--
That she repeals him for her body's lust;
And by how much she strives to do him good,
She shall undo her credit with the Moor.
So will I turn her virtue into pitch;
And out of her own goodness make the net
That shall enmesh them all.

[Enter Roderigo.]

How now, Roderigo!

RODERIGO.
I do follow here in the chase, not like a hound that hunts,
but one that fills up the cry. My money is almost spent; I
have been to-night exceedingly well cudgelled; and I think
the issue will be--I shall have so much experience for my
pains: and so, with no money at all and a little more wit,
return again to Venice.

IAGO.
How poor are they that have not patience!
What wound did ever heal but by degrees?
Thou know'st we work by wit, and not by witchcraft;
And wit depends on dilatory time.
Does't not go well? Cassio hath beaten thee,
And thou, by that small hurt, hast cashier'd Cassio;
Though other things grow fair against the sun,
Yet fruits that blossom first will first be ripe:
Content thyself awhile.--By the mass, 'tis morning;
Pleasure and action make the hours seem short.--
Retire thee; go where thou art billeted:
Away, I say; thou shalt know more hereafter;
Nay, get thee gone.

[Exit Roderigo.]

Two things are to be done,--
My wife must move for Cassio to her mistress;
I'll set her on;
Myself the while to draw the Moor apart,
And bring him jump when he may Cassio find
Soliciting his wife. Ay, that's the way;
Dull not device by coldness and delay.

[Exit.]



ACT III.

SCENE I. Cyprus. Before the Castle.

[Enter Cassio and some Musicians.]

CASSIO.
Masters, play here,--I will content your pains,
Something that's brief; and bid "Good-morrow, general."

[Music.]

[Enter Clown.]

CLOWN.
Why, masters, have your instruments been in Naples, that they
speak i' the nose thus?

FIRST MUSICIAN.
How, sir, how!

CLOWN.
Are these, I pray you, wind instruments?

FIRST MUSICIAN.
Ay, marry, are they, sir.

CLOWN.
O, thereby hangs a tale.

FIRST MUSICIAN.
Whereby hangs a tale, sir?

CLOWN.
Marry, sir, by many a wind instrument that I know. But, masters,
here's money for you: and the general so likes your music, that
he desires you, for love's sake, to make no more noise with it.

FIRST MUSICIAN.
Well, sir, we will not.

CLOWN.
If you have any music that may not be heard, to't again: but,
as they say, to hear music the general does not greatly care.

FIRST MUSICIAN.
We have none such, sir.

CLOWN.
Then put up your pipes in your bag, for I'll away: go, vanish
into air, away!

[Exeunt Musicians.]

CASSIO.
Dost thou hear, mine honest friend?

CLOWN.
No, I hear not your honest friend; I hear you.

CASSIO.
Pr'ythee, keep up thy quillets. There's a poor piece of gold
for thee: if the gentlewoman that attends the general's wife
be stirring, tell her there's one Cassio entreats her a little
favour of speech: wilt thou do this?

CLOWN.
She is stirring, sir; if she will stir hither I shall
seem to notify unto her.

CASSIO.
Do, good my friend.

[Exit Clown.]

[Enter Iago.]

In happy time, Iago.

IAGO.
You have not been a-bed, then?

CASSIO.
Why, no; the day had broke
Before we parted. I have made bold, Iago,
To send in to your wife: my suit to her
Is, that she will to virtuous Desdemona
Procure me some access.

IAGO.
I'll send her to you presently;
And I'll devise a mean to draw the Moor
Out of the way, that your converse and business
May be more free.

CASSIO.
I humbly thank you for't. [Exit Iago.] I never knew
A Florentine more kind and honest.

[Enter Emilia.]

EMILIA.
Good-morrow, good lieutenant; I am sorry
For your displeasure; but all will sure be well.
The general and his wife are talking of it;
And she speaks for you stoutly: the Moor replies
That he you hurt is of great fame in Cyprus
And great affinity, and that, in wholesome wisdom,
He might not but refuse you; but he protests he loves you
And needs no other suitor but his likings
To take the safest occasion by the front
To bring you in again.

CASSIO.
Yet, I beseech you,--
If you think fit, or that it may be done,--
Give me advantage of some brief discourse
With Desdemona alone.

EMILIA.
Pray you, come in:
I will bestow you where you shall have time
To speak your bosom freely.

CASSIO.
I am much bound to you.

[Exeunt.]



SCENE II. Cyprus. A Room in the Castle.

[Enter Othello, Iago, and Gentlemen.]

OTHELLO.
These letters give, Iago, to the pilot;
And by him do my duties to the senate:
That done, I will be walking on the works;
Repair there to me.

IAGO.
Well, my good lord, I'll do't.

OTHELLO.
This fortification, gentlemen,--shall we see't?

GENTLEMEN.
We'll wait upon your lordship.

[Exeunt.]



SCENE III. Cyprus. The Garden of the Castle.

[Enter Desdemona, Cassio, and Emilia.]

DESDEMONA.
Be thou assured, good Cassio, I will do
All my abilities in thy behalf.

EMILIA.
Good madam, do: I warrant it grieves my husband
As if the cause were his.

DESDEMONA.
O, that's an honest fellow.--Do not doubt, Cassio,
But I will have my lord and you again
As friendly as you were.

CASSIO.
Bounteous madam,
Whatever shall become of Michael Cassio,
He's never anything but your true servant.

DESDEMONA.
I know't,--I thank you. You do love my lord:
You have known him long; and be you well assur'd
He shall in strangeness stand no farther off
Than in a politic distance.

CASSIO.
Ay, but, lady,
That policy may either last so long,
Or feed upon such nice and waterish diet,
Or breed itself so out of circumstance,
That, I being absent, and my place supplied,
My general will forget my love and service.

DESDEMONA.
Do not doubt that; before Emilia here
I give thee warrant of thy place: assure thee,
If I do vow a friendship, I'll perform it
To the last article: my lord shall never rest;
I'll watch him tame, and talk him out of patience;
His bed shall seem a school, his board a shrift;
I'll intermingle everything he does
With Cassio's suit: therefore be merry, Cassio;
For thy solicitor shall rather die
Than give thy cause away.

EMILIA.
Madam, here comes my lord.

CASSIO.
Madam, I'll take my leave.

DESDEMONA.
Why, stay, and hear me speak.

CASSIO.
Madam, not now. I am very ill at ease,
Unfit for mine own purposes.

DESDEMONA.
Well, do your discretion.

[Exit Cassio.]

[Enter Othello and Iago.]

IAGO.
Ha! I like not that.

OTHELLO.
What dost thou say?

IAGO.
Nothing, my lord: or if--I know not what.

OTHELLO.
Was not that Cassio parted from my wife?

IAGO.
Cassio, my lord! No, sure, I cannot think it,
That he would steal away so guilty-like,
Seeing you coming.

OTHELLO.
I do believe 'twas he.

DESDEMONA.
How now, my lord!
I have been talking with a suitor here,
A man that languishes in your displeasure.

OTHELLO.
Who is't you mean?

DESDEMONA.
Why, your lieutenant, Cassio. Good my lord,
If I have any grace or power to move you,
His present reconciliation take;
For if he be not one that truly loves you,
That errs in ignorance and not in cunning,
I have no judgement in an honest face:
I pr'ythee, call him back.

OTHELLO.
Went he hence now?

DESDEMONA.
Ay, sooth; so humbled
That he hath left part of his grief with me
To suffer with him. Good love, call him back.

OTHELLO.
Not now, sweet Desdemon; some other time.

DESDEMONA.
But shall't be shortly?

OTHELLO.
The sooner, sweet, for you.

DESDEMONA.
Shall't be to-night at supper?

OTHELLO.
No, not to-night.

DESDEMONA.
To-morrow dinner then?

OTHELLO.
I shall not dine at home;
I meet the captains at the citadel.

DESDEMONA.
Why then to-morrow night; or Tuesday morn;
On Tuesday noon, or night; on Wednesday morn:--
I pr'ythee, name the time; but let it not
Exceed three days: in faith, he's penitent;
And yet his trespass, in our common reason,--
Save that, they say, the wars must make examples
Out of their best,--is not almost a fault
To incur a private check. When shall he come?
Tell me, Othello: I wonder in my soul,
What you would ask me, that I should deny,
Or stand so mammering on. What! Michael Cassio,
That came awooing with you; and so many a time,
When I have spoke of you dispraisingly,
Hath ta'en your part;--to have so much to do
To bring him in! Trust me, I could do much,--

OTHELLO.
Pr'ythee, no more; let him come when he will;
I will deny thee nothing.

DESDEMONA.
Why, this is not a boon;
'Tis as I should entreat you wear your gloves,
Or feed on nourishing dishes, or keep you warm,
Or sue to you to do a peculiar profit
To your own person: nay, when I have a suit
Wherein I mean to touch your love indeed,
It shall be full of poise and difficult weight,
And fearful to be granted.

OTHELLO.
I will deny thee nothing:
Whereon, I do beseech thee, grant me this,
To leave me but a little to myself.

DESDEMONA.
Shall I deny you? no: farewell, my lord.

OTHELLO.
Farewell, my Desdemona: I'll come to thee straight.

DESDEMONA.
Emilia, come.--Be as your fancies teach you;
Whate'er you be, I am obedient.

[Exit with Emilia.]

OTHELLO.
Excellent wretch! Perdition catch my soul,
But I do love thee! and when I love thee not,
Chaos is come again.

IAGO.
My noble lord,--

OTHELLO.
What dost thou say, Iago?

IAGO.
Did Michael Cassio, when you woo'd my lady,
Know of your love?

OTHELLO.
He did, from first to last: why dost thou ask?

IAGO.
But for a satisfaction of my thought;
No further harm.

OTHELLO.
Why of thy thought, Iago?

IAGO.
I did not think he had been acquainted with her.

OTHELLO.
O, yes; and went between us very oft.

IAGO.
Indeed!

OTHELLO.
Indeed! ay, indeed:--discern'st thou aught in that?
Is he not honest?

IAGO.
Honest, my lord!

OTHELLO.
Honest! ay, honest.

IAGO.
My lord, for aught I know.

OTHELLO.
What dost thou think?

IAGO.
Think, my lord!

OTHELLO.
Think, my lord! By heaven, he echoes me,
As if there were some monster in his thought
Too hideous to be shown.--Thou dost mean something:
I heard thee say even now,--thou lik'dst not that,
When Cassio left my wife. What didst not like?
And when I told thee he was of my counsel
In my whole course of wooing, thou criedst, "Indeed!"
And didst contract and purse thy brow together,
As if thou then hadst shut up in thy brain
Some horrible conceit: if thou dost love me,
Show me thy thought.

IAGO.
My lord, you know I love you.

OTHELLO.
I think thou dost;
And,--for I know thou'rt full of love and honesty
And weigh'st thy words before thou giv'st them breath,--
Therefore these stops of thine fright me the more:
For such things in a false disloyal knave
Are tricks of custom; but in a man that's just
They're close delations, working from the heart,
That passion cannot rule.

IAGO.
For Michael Cassio,
I dare be sworn I think that he is honest.

OTHELLO.
I think so too.

IAGO.
Men should be what they seem;
Or those that be not, would they might seem none!

OTHELLO.
Certain, men should be what they seem.

IAGO.
Why, then, I think Cassio's an honest man.

OTHELLO.
Nay, yet there's more in this:
I pr'ythee, speak to me as to thy thinkings,
As thou dost ruminate; and give thy worst of thoughts
The worst of words.

IAGO.
Good my lord, pardon me:
Though I am bound to every act of duty,
I am not bound to that all slaves are free to.
Utter my thoughts? Why, say they are vile and false;--
As where's that palace whereinto foul things
Sometimes intrude not? who has a breast so pure
But some uncleanly apprehensions
Keep leets and law-days, and in session sit
With meditations lawful?

OTHELLO.
Thou dost conspire against thy friend, Iago,
If thou but think'st him wrong'd and mak'st his ear
A stranger to thy thoughts.

IAGO.
I do beseech you,--
Though I perchance am vicious in my guess,
As, I confess, it is my nature's plague
To spy into abuses, and of my jealousy
Shape faults that are not,--that your wisdom yet,
From one that so imperfectly conceits,
Would take no notice; nor build yourself a trouble
Out of his scattering and unsure observance:--
It were not for your quiet nor your good,
Nor for my manhood, honesty, or wisdom,
To let you know my thoughts.

OTHELLO.
What dost thou mean?

IAGO.
Good name in man and woman, dear my lord,
Is the immediate jewel of their souls:
Who steals my purse steals trash; 'tis something, nothing;
'Twas mine, 'tis his, and has been slave to thousands;
But he that filches from me my good name
Robs me of that which not enriches him
And makes me poor indeed.

OTHELLO.
By heaven, I'll know thy thoughts.

IAGO.
You cannot, if my heart were in your hand;
Nor shall not, whilst 'tis in my custody.

OTHELLO.
Ha!

IAGO.
O, beware, my lord, of jealousy;
It is the green-ey'd monster which doth mock
The meat it feeds on: that cuckold lives in bliss
Who, certain of his fate, loves not his wronger;
But O, what damned minutes tells he o'er
Who dotes, yet doubts, suspects, yet strongly loves!

OTHELLO.
O misery!

IAGO.
Poor and content is rich, and rich enough;
But riches fineless is as poor as winter
To him that ever fears he shall be poor;--
Good heaven, the souls of all my tribe defend
From jealousy!

OTHELLO.
Why, why is this?
Think'st thou I'd make a life of jealousy,
To follow still the changes of the moon
With fresh suspicions? No; to be once in doubt
Is once to be resolv'd: exchange me for a goat
When I shall turn the business of my soul
To such exsufflicate and blown surmises,
Matching thy inference. 'Tis not to make me jealous,
To say my wife is fair, feeds well, loves company,
Is free of speech, sings, plays, and dances well;
Where virtue is, these are more virtuous:
Nor from mine own weak merits will I draw
The smallest fear or doubt of her revolt;
For she had eyes and chose me. No, Iago;
I'll see before I doubt; when I doubt, prove;
And on the proof, there is no more but this,--
Away at once with love or jealousy!

IAGO.
I am glad of it; for now I shall have reason
To show the love and duty that I bear you
With franker spirit: therefore, as I am bound,
Receive it from me:--I speak not yet of proof.
Look to your wife; observe her well with Cassio;
Wear your eye thus, not jealous nor secure:
I would not have your free and noble nature,
Out of self-bounty, be abus'd; look to't.
I know our country disposition well;
In Venice they do let heaven see the pranks
They dare not show their husbands; their best conscience
Is not to leave undone, but keep unknown.

OTHELLO.
Dost thou say so?

IAGO.
She did deceive her father, marrying you;
And when she seem'd to shake and fear your looks,
She loved them most.

OTHELLO.
And so she did.

IAGO.
Why, go to then;
She that, so young, could give out such a seeming,
To seal her father's eyes up close as oak,--
He thought 'twas witchcraft,--but I am much to blame;
I humbly do beseech you of your pardon
For too much loving you.

OTHELLO.
I am bound to thee for ever.

IAGO.
I see this hath a little dash'd your spirits.

OTHELLO.
Not a jot, not a jot.

IAGO.
Trust me, I fear it has.
I hope you will consider what is spoke
Comes from my love; but I do see you're mov'd:--
I am to pray you not to strain my speech
To grosser issues nor to larger reach
Than to suspicion.

OTHELLO.
I will not.

IAGO.
Should you do so, my lord,
My speech should fall into such vile success
Which my thoughts aim'd not. Cassio's my worthy friend:--
My lord, I see you're mov'd.

OTHELLO.
No, not much mov'd.
I do not think but Desdemona's honest.

IAGO.
Long live she so! and long live you to think so!

OTHELLO.
And yet, how nature erring from itself,--

IAGO.
Ay, there's the point:--as,--to be bold with you,--
Not to affect many proposed matches,
Of her own clime, complexion, and degree,
Whereto we see in all things nature tends,--
Foh! one may smell in such a will most rank,
Foul disproportion, thoughts unnatural:--
But pardon me: I do not in position
Distinctly speak of her; though I may fear,
Her will, recoiling to her better judgement,
May fall to match you with her country forms,
And happily repent.

OTHELLO.
Farewell, farewell:
If more thou dost perceive, let me know more;
Set on thy wife to observe: leave me, Iago.

IAGO.
[Going.] My lord, I take my leave.

OTHELLO.
Why did I marry?--This honest creature doubtless
Sees and knows more, much more, than he unfolds.

IAGO.
[Returning.] My lord, I would I might entreat your honour
To scan this thing no further; leave it to time:
Though it be fit that Cassio have his place,--
For sure he fills it up with great ability,--
Yet, if you please to hold him off awhile,
You shall by that perceive him and his means:
Note if your lady strain his entertainment
With any strong or vehement importunity;
Much will be seen in that. In the meantime,
Let me be thought too busy in my fears,--
As worthy cause I have to fear I am,--
And hold her free, I do beseech your honour.

OTHELLO.
Fear not my government.

IAGO.
I once more take my leave.

[Exit.]

OTHELLO.
This fellow's of exceeding honesty,
And knows all qualities, with a learned spirit,
Of human dealings. If I do prove her haggard,
Though that her jesses were my dear heartstrings,
I'd whistle her off, and let her down the wind
To prey at fortune. Haply, for I am black,
And have not those soft parts of conversation
That chamberers have; or for I am declin'd
Into the vale of years,--yet that's not much,--
She's gone; I am abus'd, and my relief
Must be to loathe her. O curse of marriage,
That we can call these delicate creatures ours,
And not their appetites! I had rather be a toad,
And live upon the vapor of a dungeon,
Than keep a corner in the thing I love
For others' uses. Yet, 'tis the plague of great ones:
Prerogativ'd are they less than the base;
'Tis destiny unshunnable, like death:
Even then this forked plague is fated to us
When we do quicken. Desdemona comes:
If she be false, O, then heaven mocks itself!--
I'll not believe't.

[Re-enter Desdemona and Emilia.]

DESDEMONA.
How now, my dear Othello!
Your dinner, and the generous islanders
By you invited, do attend your presence.

OTHELLO.
I am to blame.

DESDEMONA.
Why do you speak so faintly?
Are you not well?

OTHELLO.
I have a pain upon my forehead here.

DESDEMONA.
Faith, that's with watching; 'twill away again;
Let me but bind it hard, within this hour
It will be well.

OTHELLO.
Your napkin is too little;

[He puts the handkerchief from him, and she drops it.]

Let it alone. Come, I'll go in with you.

DESDEMONA.
I am very sorry that you are not well.

[Exeunt Othello and Desdemona.]

EMILIA.
I am glad I have found this napkin;
This was her first remembrance from the Moor.
My wayward husband hath a hundred times
Woo'd me to steal it; but she so loves the token,--
For he conjur'd her she should ever keep it,--
That she reserves it evermore about her
To kiss and talk to. I'll have the work ta'en out,
And give't Iago:
What he will do with it heaven knows, not I;
I nothing but to please his fantasy.

[Re-enter Iago.]

IAGO.
How now! what do you here alone?

EMILIA.
Do not you chide; I have a thing for you.

IAGO.
A thing for me!--it is a common thing.

EMILIA.
Ha!

IAGO.
To have a foolish wife.

EMILIA.
O, is that all? What will you give me now
For that same handkerchief?

IAGO.
What handkerchief?

EMILIA.
What handkerchief!
Why, that the Moor first gave to Desdemona;
That which so often you did bid me steal.

IAGO.
Hast stol'n it from her?

EMILIA.
No, faith; she let it drop by negligence,
And, to the advantage, I being here, took't up.
Look, here it is.

IAGO.
A good wench; give it me.

EMILIA.
What will you do with't, that you have been so earnest
To have me filch it?

IAGO.
[Snatching it.] Why, what's that to you?

EMILIA.
If it be not for some purpose of import,
Give't me again: poor lady, she'll run mad
When she shall lack it.

IAGO.
Be not acknown on't; I have use for it.
Go, leave me.

[Exit Emilia.]

I will in Cassio's lodging lose this napkin,
And let him find it. Trifles light as air
Are to the jealous confirmations strong
As proofs of holy writ: this may do something.
The Moor already changes with my poison:
Dangerous conceits are in their natures poisons,
Which at the first are scarce found to distaste,
But, with a little act upon the blood,
Burn like the mines of sulphur.--I did say so:--
Look, where he comes!
Not poppy, nor mandragora,
Nor all the drowsy syrups of the world,
Shall ever medicine thee to that sweet sleep
Which thou ow'dst yesterday.

[Re-enter Othello.]

OTHELLO.
Ha! ha! false to me?

IAGO.
Why, how now, general! no more of that.

OTHELLO.
Avaunt! be gone! thou hast set me on the rack:--
I swear 'tis better to be much abus'd
Than but to know't a little.

IAGO.
How now, my lord!

OTHELLO.
What sense had I of her stol'n hours of lust?
I saw't not, thought it not, it harm'd not me:
I slept the next night well, was free and merry;
I found not Cassio's kisses on her lips:
He that is robb'd, not wanting what is stol'n,
Let him not know't and he's not robb'd at all.

IAGO.
I am sorry to hear this.

OTHELLO.
I had been happy if the general camp,
Pioners and all, had tasted her sweet body,
So I had nothing known. O, now, for ever
Farewell the tranquil mind! farewell content!
Farewell the plumed troop and the big wars
That make ambition virtue! O, farewell,
Farewell the neighing steed and the shrill trump,
The spirit-stirring drum, the ear-piercing fife,
The royal banner, and all quality,
Pride, pomp, and circumstance of glorious war!
And, O you mortal engines, whose rude throats
The immortal Jove's dread clamors counterfeit,
Farewell! Othello's occupation's gone!

IAGO.
Is't possible, my lord?--

OTHELLO.
Villain, be sure thou prove my love a whore;--
[Taking him by the throat.]
Be sure of it. Give me the ocular proof;
Or, by the worth of man's eternal soul,
Thou hadst been better have been born a dog
Than answer my wak'd wrath!

IAGO.
Is't come to this?

OTHELLO.
Make me to see't; or at the least so prove it,
That the probation bear no hinge nor loop
To hang a doubt on; or woe upon thy life!

IAGO.
My noble lord,--

OTHELLO.
If thou dost slander her and torture me,
Never pray more; abandon all remorse;
On horror's head horrors accumulate;
Do deeds to make heaven weep, all earth amaz'd;
For nothing canst thou to damnation add
Greater than that.

IAGO.
O grace! O heaven defend me!
Are you a man? have you a soul or sense?--
God be wi' you; take mine office.--O wretched fool,
That liv'st to make thine honesty a vice!--
O monstrous world! Take note, take note, O world,
To be direct and honest is not safe.--
I thank you for this profit; and from hence
I'll love no friend, sith love breeds such offense.

OTHELLO.
Nay, stay:--thou shouldst be honest.

IAGO.
I should be wise; for honesty's a fool,
And loses that it works for.

OTHELLO.
By the world,
I think my wife be honest, and think she is not;
I think that thou art just, and think thou art not:
I'll have some proof: her name, that was as fresh
As Dian's visage, is now begrim'd and black
As mine own face.--If there be cords or knives,
Poison or fire, or suffocating streams,
I'll not endure 't.--Would I were satisfied!

IAGO.
I see, sir, you are eaten up with passion:
I do repent me that I put it to you.
You would be satisfied?

OTHELLO.
Would! nay, I will.

IAGO.
And may: but how? how satisfied, my lord?
Would you, the supervisor, grossly gape on,--
Behold her tupp'd?

OTHELLO.
Death and damnation! O!

IAGO.
It were a tedious difficulty, I think,
To bring them to that prospect: damn them then,
If ever mortal eyes do see them bolster
More than their own! What then? how then?
What shall I say? Where's satisfaction?
It is impossible you should see this
Were they as prime as goats, as hot as monkeys,
As salt as wolves in pride, and fools as gross
As ignorance made drunk. But yet, I say,
If imputation and strong circumstances,--
Which lead directly to the door of truth,--
Will give you satisfaction, you may have't.

OTHELLO.
Give me a living reason she's disloyal.

IAGO.
I do not like the office;
But, sith I am enter'd in this cause so far,--
Prick'd to it by foolish honesty and love,--
I will go on. I lay with Cassio lately;
And, being troubled with a raging tooth,
I could not sleep.
There are a kind of men so loose of soul,
That in their sleeps will mutter their affairs:
One of this kind is Cassio:
In sleep I heard him say, "Sweet Desdemona,
Let us be wary, let us hide our loves";
And then, sir, would he gripe and wring my hand,
Cry, "O sweet creature!" and then kiss me hard,
As if he pluck'd up kisses by the roots,
That grew upon my lips: then laid his leg
Over my thigh, and sigh'd and kiss'd; and then
Cried, "Cursed fate that gave thee to the Moor!"

OTHELLO.
O monstrous! monstrous!

IAGO.
Nay, this was but his dream.

OTHELLO.
But this denoted a foregone conclusion:
'Tis a shrewd doubt, though it be but a dream.

IAGO.
And this may help to thicken other proofs
That do demonstrate thinly.

OTHELLO.
I'll tear her all to pieces.

IAGO.
Nay, but be wise: yet we see nothing done;
She may be honest yet. Tell me but this,--
Have you not sometimes seen a handkerchief
Spotted with strawberries in your wife's hand?

OTHELLO.
I gave her such a one; 'twas my first gift.

IAGO.
I know not that: but such a handkerchief,--
I am sure it was your wife's,--did I today
See Cassio wipe his beard with.

OTHELLO.
If it be that,--

IAGO.
If it be that, or any that was hers,
It speaks against her with the other proofs.

OTHELLO.
O, that the slave had forty thousand lives,--
One is too poor, too weak for my revenge!
Now do I see 'tis true.--Look here, Iago;
All my fond love thus do I blow to heaven:
'Tis gone.--
Arise, black vengeance, from thy hollow hell!
Yield up, O love, thy crown and hearted throne
To tyrannous hate! swell, bosom, with thy fraught,
For 'tis of aspics' tongues!

IAGO.
Yet be content.

OTHELLO.
O, blood, Iago, blood!

IAGO.
Patience, I say; your mind perhaps may change.

OTHELLO.
Never, Iago. Like to the Pontic Sea,
Whose icy current and compulsive course
Ne'er feels retiring ebb, but keeps due on
To the Propontic and the Hellespont;
Even so my bloody thoughts, with violent pace,
Shall ne'er look back, ne'er ebb to humble love,
Till that a capable and wide revenge
Swallow them up.--Now, by yond marble heaven,
In the due reverence of a sacred vow [Kneels.]
I here engage my words.

IAGO.
Do not rise yet.-- [Kneels.]
Witness, you ever-burning lights above,
You elements that clip us round about,--
Witness that here Iago doth give up
The execution of his wit, hands, heart,
To wrong'd Othello's service! Let him command,
And to obey shall be in me remorse,
What bloody business ever. [They rise.]

OTHELLO.
I greet thy love,
Not with vain thanks, but with acceptance bounteous,
And will upon the instant put thee to't:
Within these three days let me hear thee say
That Cassio's not alive.

IAGO.
My friend is dead; 'tis done at your request:
But let her live.

OTHELLO.
Damn her, lewd minx! O, damn her!
Come, go with me apart; I will withdraw
To furnish me with some swift means of death
For the fair devil. Now art thou my lieutenant.

IAGO.
I am your own for ever.

[Exeunt.]



SCENE IV. Cyprus. Before the Castle.

[Enter Desdemona, Emilia, and Clown.]

DESDEMONA.
Do you know, sirrah, where Lieutenant Cassio lies?

CLOWN.
I dare not say he lies anywhere.

DESDEMONA.
Why, man?

CLOWN.
He's a soldier; and for one to say a soldier lies is stabbing.

DESDEMONA.
Go to: where lodges he?

CLOWN.
To tell you where he lodges is to tell you where I lie.

DESDEMONA.
Can anything be made of this?

CLOWN.
I know not where he lodges; and for me to devise a lodging,
and say he lies here or he lies there were to lie in mine
own throat.

DESDEMONA.
Can you inquire him out, and be edified by report?

CLOWN.
I will catechize the world for him; that is, make questions
and by them answer.

DESDEMONA.
Seek him, bid him come hither: tell him I have moved my lord
on his behalf, and hope all will be well.

CLOWN.
To do this is within the compass of man's wit; and therefore
I will attempt the doing it.

[Exit.]

DESDEMONA.
Where should I lose that handkerchief, Emilia?

EMILIA.
I know not, madam.

DESDEMONA.
Believe me, I had rather have lost my purse
Full of crusadoes: and, but my noble Moor
Is true of mind and made of no such baseness
As jealous creatures are, it were enough
To put him to ill thinking.

EMILIA.
Is he not jealous?

DESDEMONA.
Who, he? I think the sun where he was born
Drew all such humours from him.

EMILIA.
Look, where he comes.

DESDEMONA.
I will not leave him now till Cassio
Be call'd to him.

[Enter Othello.]

How is't with you, my lord?

OTHELLO.
Well, my good lady.--[Aside.] O, hardness to dissemble!--
How do you, Desdemona?

DESDEMONA.
Well, my good lord.

OTHELLO.
Give me your hand: this hand is moist, my lady.

DESDEMONA.
It yet hath felt no age nor known no sorrow.

OTHELLO.
This argues fruitfulness and liberal heart:--
Hot, hot, and moist: this hand of yours requires
A sequester from liberty, fasting, and prayer,
Much castigation, exercise devout;
For here's a young and sweating devil here
That commonly rebels. 'Tis a good hand,
A frank one.

DESDEMONA.
You may, indeed, say so;
For 'twas that hand that gave away my heart.

OTHELLO.
A liberal hand: the hearts of old gave hands;
But our new heraldry is hands, not hearts.

DESDEMONA.
I cannot speak of this. Come now, your promise.

OTHELLO.
What promise, chuck?

DESDEMONA.
I have sent to bid Cassio come speak with you.

OTHELLO.
I have a salt and sorry rheum offends me;
Lend me thy handkerchief.

DESDEMONA.
Here, my lord.

OTHELLO.
That which I gave you.

DESDEMONA.
I have it not about me.

OTHELLO.
Not?

DESDEMONA.
No, faith, my lord.

OTHELLO.
That is a fault. That handkerchief
Did an Egyptian to my mother give;
She was a charmer, and could almost read
The thoughts of people: she told her, while she kept it,
'Twould make her amiable and subdue my father
Entirely to her love; but if she lost it
Or made a gift of it, my father's eye
Should hold her loathed, and his spirits should hunt
After new fancies: she, dying, gave it me;
And bid me, when my fate would have me wive,
To give it her. I did so: and take heed on't;
Make it a darling like your precious eye;
To lose't or give't away were such perdition
As nothing else could match.

DESDEMONA.
Is't possible?

OTHELLO.
'Tis true: there's magic in the web of it:
A sibyl, that had number'd in the world
The sun to course two hundred compasses,
In her prophetic fury sew'd the work;
The worms were hallow'd that did breed the silk;
And it was dy'd in mummy which the skillful
Conserv'd of maiden's hearts.

DESDEMONA.
Indeed! is't true?

OTHELLO.
Most veritable; therefore look to't well.

DESDEMONA.
Then would to God that I had never seen't!

OTHELLO.
Ha! wherefore?

DESDEMONA.
Why do you speak so startingly and rash?

OTHELLO.
Is't lost? is't gone? speak, is it out of the way?

DESDEMONA.
Heaven bless us!

OTHELLO.
Say you?

DESDEMONA.
It is not lost; but what an if it were?

OTHELLO.
How!

DESDEMONA.
I say, it is not lost.

OTHELLO.
Fetch't, let me see't.

DESDEMONA.
Why, so I can, sir, but I will not now.
This is a trick to put me from my suit:
Pray you, let Cassio be receiv'd again.

OTHELLO.
Fetch me the handkerchief: my mind misgives.

DESDEMONA.
Come, come;
You'll never meet a more sufficient man.

OTHELLO.
The handkerchief!

DESDEMONA.
I pray, talk me of Cassio.

OTHELLO.
The handkerchief!

DESDEMONA.
A man that all his time
Hath founded his good fortunes on your love,
Shar'd dangers with you,--

OTHELLO.
The handkerchief!

DESDEMONA.
In sooth, you are to blame.

OTHELLO.
Away!

[Exit.]

EMILIA.
Is not this man jealous?

DESDEMONA.
I ne'er saw this before.
Sure there's some wonder in this handkerchief;
I am most unhappy in the loss of it.

EMILIA.
'Tis not a year or two shows us a man:
They are all but stomachs and we all but food:
They eat us hungerly, and when they are full,
They belch us.--Look you,--Cassio and my husband.

[Enter Cassio and Iago.]

IAGO.
There is no other way; 'tis she must do't:
And, lo, the happiness! go and importune her.

DESDEMONA.
How now, good Cassio! what's the news with you?

CASSIO.
Madam, my former suit: I do beseech you
That by your virtuous means I may again
Exist, and be a member of his love,
Whom I, with all the office of my heart,
Entirely honour: I would not be delay'd.
If my offence be of such mortal kind
That nor my service past, nor present sorrows,
Nor purpos'd merit in futurity,
Can ransom me into his love again,
But to know so must be my benefit;
So shall I clothe me in a forc'd content,
And shut myself up in some other course,
To fortune's alms.

DESDEMONA.
Alas, thrice-gentle Cassio!
My advocation is not now in tune;
My lord is not my lord; nor should I know him
Were he in favour as in humour alter'd.
So help me every spirit sanctified,
As I have spoken for you all my best,
And stood within the blank of his displeasure
For my free speech! You must awhile be patient:
What I can do I will; and more I will
Than for myself I dare: let that suffice you.

IAGO.
Is my lord angry?

EMILIA.
He went hence but now,
And certainly in strange unquietness.

IAGO.
Can he be angry? I have seen the cannon,
When it hath blown his ranks into the air
And, like the devil, from his very arm
Puff'd his own brother;--and can he be angry?
Something of moment, then: I will go meet him:
There's matter in't indeed if he be angry.

DESDEMONA.
I pr'ythee, do so. 

[Exit Iago.]

Something sure of state,--
Either from Venice or some unhatch'd practice
Made demonstrable here in Cyprus to him,--
Hath puddled his clear spirit, and in such cases
Men's natures wrangle with inferior things,
Though great ones are their object. 'Tis even so;
For let our finger ache, and it indues
Our other healthful members even to that sense
Of pain: nay, we must think men are not gods,
Nor of them look for such observancy
As fits the bridal.--Beshrew me much, Emilia,
I was,--unhandsome warrior as I am,--
Arraigning his unkindness with my soul;
But now I find I had suborn'd the witness,
And he's indicted falsely.

EMILIA.
Pray heaven it be state matters, as you think,
And no conception nor no jealous toy
Concerning you.

DESDEMONA.
Alas the day, I never gave him cause!

EMILIA.
But jealous souls will not be answer'd so;
They are not ever jealous for the cause,
But jealous for they are jealous: 'tis a monster
Begot upon itself, born on itself.

DESDEMONA.
Heaven keep that monster from Othello's mind!

EMILIA.
Lady, amen.

DESDEMONA.
I will go seek him.--Cassio, walk hereabout:
If I do find him fit, I'll move your suit,
And seek to effect it to my uttermost.

CASSIO.
I humbly thank your ladyship.

[Exeunt Desdemona and Emilia.]

[Enter Bianca.]

BIANCA.
Save you, friend Cassio!

CASSIO.
What make you from home?
How is it with you, my most fair Bianca?
I'faith, sweet love, I was coming to your house.

BIANCA.
And I was going to your lodging, Cassio.
What, keep a week away? seven days and nights?
Eight score eight hours? and lovers' absent hours,
More tedious than the dial eight score times?
O weary reckoning!

CASSIO.
Pardon me, Bianca:
I have this while with leaden thoughts been press'd;
But I shall in a more continuate time
Strike off this score of absence. Sweet Bianca,

[Giving her Desdemona's handkerchief.]

Take me this work out.

BIANCA.
O Cassio, whence came this?
This is some token from a newer friend.
To the felt absence now I feel a cause:
Is't come to this? Well, well.

CASSIO.
Go to, woman!
Throw your vile guesses in the devil's teeth,
From whence you have them. You are jealous now
That this is from some mistress, some remembrance:
No, in good troth, Bianca.

BIANCA.
Why, whose is it?

CASSIO.
I know not neither: I found it in my chamber.
I like the work well: ere it be demanded,--
As like enough it will,--I'd have it copied:
Take it, and do't; and leave me for this time.

BIANCA.
Leave you! wherefore?

CASSIO.
I do attend here on the general;
And think it no addition, nor my wish,
To have him see me woman'd.

BIANCA.
Why, I pray you?

CASSIO.
Not that I love you not.

BIANCA.
But that you do not love me.
I pray you, bring me on the way a little;
And say if I shall see you soon at night.

CASSIO.
'Tis but a little way that I can bring you,
For I attend here: but I'll see you soon.

BIANCA.
'Tis very good; I must be circumstanc'd.

[Exeunt.]



ACT IV.

SCENE I. Cyprus. Before the Castle.

[Enter Othello and Iago.]

IAGO.
Will you think so?

OTHELLO.
Think so, Iago?

IAGO.
What,
To kiss in private?

OTHELLO.
An unauthoriz'd kiss.

IAGO.
Or to be naked with her friend in bed
An hour or more, not meaning any harm?

OTHELLO.
Naked in bed, Iago, and not mean harm!
It is hypocrisy against the devil:
They that mean virtuously and yet do so,
The devil their virtue tempts, and they tempt heaven.

IAGO.
So they do nothing, 'tis a venial slip:
But if I give my wife a handkerchief,--

OTHELLO.
What then?

IAGO.
Why, then, 'tis hers, my lord, and being hers,
She may, I think, bestow't on any man.

OTHELLO.
She is protectress of her honour too:
May she give that?

IAGO.
Her honour is an essence that's not seen;
They have it very oft that have it not:
But, for the handkerchief,--

OTHELLO.
By heaven, I would most gladly have forgot it:--
Thou said'st,--O, it comes o'er my memory,
As doth the raven o'er the infected house,
Boding to all,--he had my handkerchief.

IAGO.
Ay, what of that?

OTHELLO.
That's not so good now.

IAGO.
What,
If I had said I had seen him do you wrong?
Or heard him say,--as knaves be such abroad,
Who having, by their own importunate suit,
Or voluntary dotage of some mistress,
Convinced or supplied them, cannot choose
But they must blab,--

OTHELLO.
Hath he said anything?

IAGO.
He hath, my lord; but be you well assur'd,
No more than he'll unswear.

OTHELLO.
What hath he said?

IAGO.
Faith, that he did,--I know not what he did.

OTHELLO.
What? what?

IAGO.
Lie,--

OTHELLO.
With her?

IAGO.
With her, on her, what you will.

OTHELLO.
Lie with her! lie on her!--We say lie on her when they belie
her.--Lie with her! that's fulsome.--Handkerchief--confessions--
handkerchief!--To confess, and be hanged for his labour,--first,
to be hanged, and then to confess.--I tremble at it. Nature
would not invest herself in such shadowing passion without some
instruction. It is not words that shake me thus:--pish!--noses,
ears, and lips.--Is't possible?--Confess,--handkerchief!--O
devil!--

[Falls in a trance.]

IAGO.
Work on,
My medicine, work! Thus credulous fools are caught;
And many worthy and chaste dames even thus,
All guiltless, meet reproach.--What, ho! my lord!
My lord, I say! Othello!

[Enter Cassio.]

How now, Cassio!

CASSIO.
What's the matter?

IAGO.
My lord is fallen into an epilepsy:
This is his second fit; he had one yesterday.

CASSIO.
Rub him about the temples.

IAGO.
No, forbear;
The lethargy must have his quiet course:
If not, he foams at mouth, and by and by
Breaks out to savage madness. Look, he stirs:
Do you withdraw yourself a little while,
He will recover straight: when he is gone,
I would on great occasion speak with you.

[Exit Cassio.]

How is it, general? have you not hurt your head?

OTHELLO.
Dost thou mock me?

IAGO.
I mock you! no, by heaven.
Would you would bear your fortune like a man!

OTHELLO.
A horned man's a monster and a beast.

IAGO.
There's many a beast, then, in a populous city,
And many a civil monster.

OTHELLO.
Did he confess it?

IAGO.
Good sir, be a man;
Think every bearded fellow that's but yok'd
May draw with you: there's millions now alive
That nightly lie in those unproper beds
Which they dare swear peculiar: your case is better.
O, 'tis the spite of hell, the fiend's arch-mock,
To lip a wanton in a secure couch,
And to suppose her chaste! No, let me know;
And knowing what I am, I know what she shall be.

OTHELLO.
O, thou art wise; 'tis certain.

IAGO.
Stand you awhile apart;
Confine yourself but in a patient list.
Whilst you were here o'erwhelmed with your grief,--
A passion most unsuiting such a man,--
Cassio came hither: I shifted him away,
And laid good 'scuse upon your ecstasy;
Bade him anon return, and here speak with me;
The which he promis'd. Do but encave yourself,
And mark the fleers, the gibes, and notable scorns,
That dwell in every region of his face;
For I will make him tell the tale anew,--
Where, how, how oft, how long ago, and when
He hath, and is again to cope your wife:
I say, but mark his gesture. Marry, patience;
Or I shall say you are all in all in spleen,
And nothing of a man.

OTHELLO.
Dost thou hear, Iago?
I will be found most cunning in my patience;
But,--dost thou hear?--most bloody.

IAGO.
That's not amiss;
But yet keep time in all. Will you withdraw?

[Othello withdraws.]

Now will I question Cassio of Bianca,
A housewife that, by selling her desires,
Buys herself bread and clothes: it is a creature
That dotes on Cassio,--as 'tis the strumpet's plague
To beguile many and be beguil'd by one:--
He, when he hears of her, cannot refrain
From the excess of laughter:--here he comes:--
As he shall smile Othello shall go mad;
And his unbookish jealousy must construe
Poor Cassio's smiles, gestures, and light behavior
Quite in the wrong.

[Re-enter Cassio.]

How do you now, lieutenant?

CASSIO.
The worser that you give me the addition
Whose want even kills me.

IAGO.
Ply Desdemona well, and you are sure on't.
[Speaking lower.] Now, if this suit lay in Bianca's power,
How quickly should you speed!

CASSIO.
Alas, poor caitiff!

OTHELLO.
[Aside.] Look, how he laughs already!

IAGO.
I never knew a woman love man so.

CASSIO.
Alas, poor rogue! I think, i'faith, she loves me.

OTHELLO.
[Aside.] Now he denies it faintly and laughs it out.

IAGO.
Do you hear, Cassio?

OTHELLO.
[Aside.] Now he importunes him
To tell it o'er: go to; well said, well said.

IAGO.
She gives it out that you shall marry her:
Do you intend it?

CASSIO.
Ha, ha, ha!

OTHELLO.
[Aside.] Do you triumph, Roman? do you triumph?

CASSIO.
I marry her!--what? A customer! I pr'ythee, bear some charity
to my wit; do not think it so unwholesome:--ha, ha, ha!

OTHELLO.
[Aside.] So, so, so, so: they laugh that win.

IAGO.
Faith, the cry goes that you shall marry her.

CASSIO.
Pr'ythee, say true.

IAGO.
I am a very villain else.

OTHELLO.
[Aside.] Have you scored me? Well.

CASSIO.
This is the monkey's own giving out: she is persuaded I will
marry her, out of her own love and flattery, not out of my
promise.

OTHELLO.
[Aside.] Iago beckons me; now he begins the story.

CASSIO.
She was here even now; she haunts me in every place. I was the
other day talking on the sea bank with certain Venetians, and
thither comes the bauble, and falls thus about my neck,--

OTHELLO.
[Aside.] Crying, "O dear Cassio!" as it were: his gesture imports
it.

CASSIO.
So hangs, and lolls, and weeps upon me; so hales and pulls me:
ha, ha, ha!

OTHELLO.
[Aside.] Now he tells how she plucked him to my chamber. O, I see
that nose of yours, but not that dog I shall throw it to.

CASSIO.
Well, I must leave her company.

IAGO.
Before me! look where she comes.

CASSIO.
'Tis such another fitchew! marry, a perfumed one.

[Enter Bianca.]

What do you mean by this haunting of me?

BIANCA.
Let the devil and his dam haunt you! What did you mean
by that same handkerchief you gave me even now? I was a fine
fool to take it. I must take out the work?--A likely piece of
work that you should find it in your chamber and not know who
left it there! This is some minx's token, and I must take out the
work? There,--give it your hobby-horse: wheresoever you had it,
I'll take out no work on't.

CASSIO.
How now, my sweet Bianca! how now! how now!

OTHELLO.
[Aside.] By heaven, that should be my handkerchief!

BIANCA.
An you'll come to supper to-night, you may; an you will
not, come when you are next prepared for.

[Exit.]

IAGO.
After her, after her.

CASSIO.
Faith, I must; she'll rail in the street else.

IAGO.
Will you sup there?

CASSIO.
Faith, I intend so.

IAGO.
Well, I may chance to see you; for I would very fain
speak with you.

CASSIO.
Pr'ythee, come; will you?

IAGO.
Go to; say no more.

[Exit Cassio.]

OTHELLO.
[Coming forward.] How shall I murder him, Iago?

IAGO.
Did you perceive how he laughed at his vice?

OTHELLO.
O Iago!

IAGO.
And did you see the handkerchief?

OTHELLO.
Was that mine?

IAGO.
Yours, by this hand: and to see how he prizes the foolish woman
your wife! she gave it him, and he hath given it his whore.

OTHELLO.
I would have him nine years a-killing.--A fine woman! a fair
woman! a sweet woman!

IAGO.
Nay, you must forget that.

OTHELLO.
Ay, let her rot, and perish, and be damned to-night; for
she shall not live: no, my heart is turned to stone; I strike
it, and it hurts my hand.--O, the world hath not a sweeter
creature: she might lie by an emperor's side, and command him
tasks.

IAGO.
Nay, that's not your way.

OTHELLO.
Hang her! I do but say what she is:--so delicate with her
needle!--an admirable musician! O, she will sing the savageness
out of a bear!--Of so high and plenteous wit and invention!--

IAGO.
She's the worse for all this.

OTHELLO.
O, a thousand, a thousand times:--and then, of so gentle a
condition!

IAGO.
Ay, too gentle.

OTHELLO.
Nay, that's certain:--but yet the pity of it, Iago!
O Iago, the pity of it, Iago!

IAGO.
If you are so fond over her iniquity, give her patent to
offend; for, if it touch not you, it comes near nobody.

OTHELLO.
I will chop her into messes.--Cuckold me!

IAGO.
O, 'tis foul in her.

OTHELLO.
With mine officer!

IAGO.
That's fouler.

OTHELLO.
Get me some poison, Iago; this night.--I'll not expostulate
with her, lest her body and beauty unprovide my mind again:--
this night, Iago.

IAGO.
Do it not with poison; strangle her in her bed, even the
bed she hath contaminated.

OTHELLO.
Good, good: the justice of it pleases: very good.

IAGO.
And for Cassio,--let me be his undertaker:--you shall hear
more by midnight.

OTHELLO.
Excellent good. [A trumpet within.] What trumpet is that same?

IAGO.
Something from Venice, sure. 'Tis Lodovico
Come from the duke: and, see, your wife is with him.

[Enter Lodovico, Desdemona, and Attendants.]

LODOVICO.
Save you, worthy general!

OTHELLO.
With all my heart, sir.

LODOVICO.
The duke and senators of Venice greet you.

[Gives him a packet.]

OTHELLO.
I kiss the instrument of their pleasures.

[Opens the packet and reads.]

DESDEMONA.
And what's the news, good cousin Lodovico?

IAGO.
I am very glad to see you, signior;
Welcome to Cyprus.

LODOVICO.
I thank you. How does Lieutenant Cassio?

IAGO.
Lives, sir.

DESDEMONA.
Cousin, there's fall'n between him and my lord
An unkind breach: but you shall make all well.

OTHELLO.
Are you sure of that?

DESDEMONA.
My lord?

OTHELLO.
[Reads.] "This fail you not to do, as you will,--"

LODOVICO.
He did not call; he's busy in the paper.
Is there division 'twixt my lord and Cassio?

DESDEMONA.
A most unhappy one: I would do much
To atone them, for the love I bear to Cassio.

OTHELLO.
Fire and brimstone!

DESDEMONA.
My lord?

OTHELLO.
Are you wise?

DESDEMONA.
What, is he angry?

LODOVICO.
May be the letter mov'd him;
For, as I think, they do command him home,
Deputing Cassio in his government.

DESDEMONA.
Trust me, I am glad on't.

OTHELLO.
Indeed!

DESDEMONA.
My lord?

OTHELLO.
I am glad to see you mad.

DESDEMONA.
Why, sweet Othello,--

OTHELLO.
Devil! [Striking her.]

DESDEMONA.
I have not deserv'd this.

LODOVICO.
My lord, this would not be believ'd in Venice,
Though I should swear I saw't: 'tis very much:
Make her amends; she weeps.

OTHELLO.
O devil, devil!
If that the earth could teem with woman's tears,
Each drop she falls would prove a crocodile.--
Out of my sight!

DESDEMONA.
[Going.] I will not stay to offend you.

LODOVICO.
Truly, an obedient lady:--
I do beseech your lordship, call her back.

OTHELLO.
Mistress!

DESDEMONA.
My lord?

OTHELLO.
What would you with her, sir?

LODOVICO.
Who, I, my lord?

OTHELLO.
Ay; you did wish that I would make her turn:
Sir, she can turn, and turn, and yet go on,
And turn again; and she can weep, sir, weep;
And she's obedient, as you say,--obedient,--
Very obedient.--Proceed you in your tears.--
Concerning this, sir,--O well-painted passion!
I am commanded home.--Get you away;
I'll send for you anon.--Sir, I obey the mandate,
And will return to Venice.--Hence, avaunt!

[Exit Desdemona.]

Cassio shall have my place. And, sir, to-night,
I do entreat that we may sup together:
You are welcome, sir, to Cyprus.--Goats and monkeys!

[Exit.]

LODOVICO.
Is this the noble Moor whom our full senate
Call all-in-all sufficient? Is this the nature
Whom passion could not shake? whose solid virtue
The shot of accident nor dart of chance
Could neither graze nor pierce?

IAGO.
He is much chang'd.

LODOVICO.
Are his wits safe? is he not light of brain?

IAGO.
He's that he is: I may not breathe my censure
What he might be,--if what he might he is not,--
I would to heaven he were!

LODOVICO.
What, strike his wife!

IAGO.
Faith, that was not so well; yet would I knew
That stroke would prove the worst!

LODOVICO.
Is it his use?
Or did the letters work upon his blood,
And new-create this fault?

IAGO.
Alas, alas!
It is not honesty in me to speak
What I have seen and known. You shall observe him;
And his own courses will denote him so
That I may save my speech: do but go after,
And mark how he continues.

LODOVICO.
I am sorry that I am deceiv'd in him.

[Exeunt.]




SCENE II. Cyprus. A Room in the Castle.

[Enter Othello and Emilia.]

OTHELLO.
You have seen nothing, then?

EMILIA.
Nor ever heard, nor ever did suspect.

OTHELLO.
Yes, you have seen Cassio and she together.

EMILIA.
But then I saw no harm, and then I heard
Each syllable that breath made up between them.

OTHELLO.
What, did they never whisper?

EMILIA.
Never, my lord.

OTHELLO.
Nor send you out o' the way?

EMILIA.
Never.

OTHELLO.
To fetch her fan, her gloves, her mask, nor nothing?

EMILIA.
Never, my lord.

OTHELLO.
That's strange.

EMILIA.
I durst, my lord, to wager she is honest,
Lay down my soul at stake: if you think other,
Remove your thought,--it doth abuse your bosom.
If any wretch have put this in your head,
Let heaven requite it with the serpent's curse!
For if she be not honest, chaste, and true,
There's no man happy; the purest of their wives
Is foul as slander.

OTHELLO.
Bid her come hither.--Go.

[Exit Emilia.]

She says enough; yet she's a simple bawd
That cannot say as much. This is a subtle whore,
A closet-lock-and-key of villainous secrets:
And yet she'll kneel and pray; I have seen her do't.

[Enter Emilia with Desdemona.]

DESDEMONA.
My lord, what is your will?

OTHELLO.
Pray, chuck, come hither.

DESDEMONA.
What is your pleasure?

OTHELLO.
Let me see your eyes;
Look in my face.

DESDEMONA.
What horrible fancy's this?

OTHELLO.
Some of your function, mistress, [To Emilia.]
Leave procreants alone and shut the door;
Cough, or cry hem, if anybody come.
Your mystery, your mystery;--nay, despatch.

[Exit Emilia.]

DESDEMONA.
Upon my knees, what doth your speech import?
I understand a fury in your words,
But not the words.

OTHELLO.
Why, what art thou?

DESDEMONA.
Your wife, my lord; your true and loyal wife.

OTHELLO.
Come, swear it, damn thyself;
Lest, being like one of heaven, the devils themselves
Should fear to seize thee: therefore be double-damn'd.--
Swear thou art honest.

DESDEMONA.
Heaven doth truly know it.

OTHELLO.
Heaven truly knows that thou art false as hell.

DESDEMONA.
To whom, my lord? with whom? how am I false?

OTHELLO.
O Desdemona!--away! away! away!

DESDEMONA.
Alas the heavy day!--Why do you weep?
Am I the motive of these tears, my lord?
If haply you my father do suspect
An instrument of this your calling back,
Lay not your blame on me: if you have lost him,
Why, I have lost him too.

OTHELLO.
Had it pleas'd heaven
To try me with affliction; had they rain'd
All kinds of sores and shames on my bare head;
Steep'd me in poverty to the very lips;
Given to captivity me and my utmost hopes;
I should have found in some place of my soul
A drop of patience: but, alas, to make me
A fixed figure for the time, for scorn
To point his slow unmoving finger at!--
Yet could I bear that too; well, very well:
But there, where I have garner'd up my heart;
Where either I must live or bear no life,--
The fountain from the which my current runs,
Or else dries up; to be discarded thence!
Or keep it as a cistern for foul toads
To knot and gender in!--turn thy complexion there,
Patience, thou young and rose-lipp'd cherubin,--
Ay, there, look grim as hell!

DESDEMONA.
I hope my noble lord esteems me honest.

OTHELLO.
O, ay; as summer flies are in the shambles,
That quicken even with blowing. O thou weed,
Who art so lovely fair, and smell'st so sweet,
That the sense aches at thee,--would thou hadst ne'er been born!

DESDEMONA.
Alas, what ignorant sin have I committed?

OTHELLO.
Was this fair paper, this most goodly book,
Made to write "whore" upon? What committed!
Committed!--O thou public commoner!
I should make very forges of my cheeks,
That would to cinders burn up modesty,
Did I but speak thy deeds.--What committed!
Heaven stops the nose at it, and the moon winks;
The bawdy wind, that kisses all it meets,
Is hush'd within the hollow mine of earth,
And will not hear it.--What committed!--
Impudent strumpet!

DESDEMONA.
By heaven, you do me wrong.

OTHELLO.
Are not you a strumpet?

DESDEMONA.
No, as I am a Christian:
If to preserve this vessel for my lord
From any other foul unlawful touch
Be not to be a strumpet, I am none.

OTHELLO.
What, not a whore?

DESDEMONA.
No, as I shall be sav'd.

OTHELLO.
Is't possible?

DESDEMONA.
O, heaven forgive us!

OTHELLO.
I cry you mercy then:
I took you for that cunning whore of Venice
That married with Othello.--You, mistress,
That have the office opposite to Saint Peter,
And keep the gate of hell!

[Re-enter Emilia.]

You, you, ay, you!
We have done our course; there's money for your pains:
I pray you, turn the key, and keep our counsel.

[Exit.]

EMILIA.
Alas, what does this gentleman conceive?--
How do you, madam? how do you, my good lady?

DESDEMONA.
Faith, half asleep.

EMILIA.
Good madam, what's the matter with my lord?

DESDEMONA.
With who?

EMILIA.
Why, with my lord, madam.

DESDEMONA.
Who is thy lord?

EMILIA.
He that is yours, sweet lady.

DESDEMONA.
I have none: do not talk to me, Emilia;
I cannot weep; nor answer have I none
But what should go by water. Pr'ythee, to-night
Lay on my bed my wedding sheets,--remember;--
And call thy husband hither.

EMILIA.
Here's a change indeed!

[Exit.]

DESDEMONA.
'Tis meet I should be us'd so, very meet.
How have I been behav'd, that he might stick
The small'st opinion on my least misuse?

[Re-enter Emilia with Iago.]

IAGO.
What is your pleasure, madam? How is't with you?

DESDEMONA.
I cannot tell. Those that do teach young babes
Do it with gentle means and easy tasks:
He might have chid me so; for in good faith,
I am a child to chiding.

IAGO.
What's the matter, lady?

EMILIA.
Alas, Iago, my lord hath so bewhor'd her,
Thrown such despite and heavy terms upon her,
As true hearts cannot bear.

DESDEMONA.
Am I that name, Iago?

IAGO.
What name, fair lady?

DESDEMONA.
Such as she says my lord did say I was.

EMILIA.
He call'd her whore: a beggar in his drink
Could not have laid such terms upon his callet.

IAGO.
Why did he so?

DESDEMONA.
I do not know; I am sure I am none such.

IAGO.
Do not weep, do not weep:--alas the day!

EMILIA.
Hath she forsook so many noble matches,
Her father, and her country, and her friends,
To be call'd whore? would it not make one weep?

DESDEMONA.
It is my wretched fortune.

IAGO.
Beshrew him for't!
How comes this trick upon him?

DESDEMONA.
Nay, heaven doth know.

EMILIA.
I will be hang'd, if some eternal villain,
Some busy and insinuating rogue,
Some cogging, cozening slave, to get some office,
Have not devis'd this slander; I'll be hang'd else.

IAGO.
Fie, there is no such man; it is impossible.

DESDEMONA.
If any such there be, heaven pardon him!

EMILIA.
A halter pardon him! and hell gnaw his bones!
Why should he call her whore? who keeps her company?
What place? what time? what form? what likelihood?
The Moor's abused by some most villainous knave,
Some base notorious knave, some scurvy fellow:--
O heaven, that such companions thou'dst unfold,
And put in every honest hand a whip
To lash the rascals naked through the world
Even from the east to the west!

IAGO.
Speak within door.

EMILIA.
O, fie upon them! some such squire he was
That turn'd your wit the seamy side without,
And made you to suspect me with the Moor.

IAGO.
You are a fool; go to.

DESDEMONA.
Alas, Iago,
What shall I do to win my lord again?
Good friend, go to him; for by this light of heaven,
I know not how I lost him. Here I kneel:--
If e'er my will did trespass 'gainst his love,
Either in discourse of thought or actual deed;
Or that mine eyes, mine ears, or any sense,
Delighted them in any other form;
Or that I do not yet, and ever did,
And ever will, though he do shake me off
To beggarly divorcement,--love him dearly,
Comfort forswear me! Unkindness may do much;
And his unkindness may defeat my life,
But never taint my love. I cannot say "whore,"--
It does abhor me now I speak the word;
To do the act that might the addition earn
Not the world's mass of vanity could make me.

IAGO.
I pray you, be content; 'tis but his humour:
The business of the state does him offence,
And he does chide with you.

DESDEMONA.
If 'twere no other,--

IAGO.
'Tis but so, I warrant.

[Trumpets within.]

Hark, how these instruments summon to supper!
The messengers of Venice stay the meat:
Go in, and weep not; all things shall be well.

[Exeunt Desdemona and Emilia.]

[Enter Roderigo.]

How now, Roderigo!

RODERIGO.
I do not find that thou dealest justly with me.

IAGO.
What in the contrary?

RODERIGO.
Every day thou daffest me with some device, Iago; and rather,
as it seems to me now, keepest from me all conveniency than
suppliest me with the least advantage of hope. I will indeed
no longer endure it; nor am I yet persuaded to put up in
peace what already I have foolishly suffered.

IAGO.
Will you hear me, Roderigo?

RODERIGO.
Faith, I have heard too much; for your words and performances
are no kin together.

IAGO.
You charge me most unjustly.

RODERIGO.
With naught but truth. I have wasted myself out of my means.
The jewels you have had from me to deliver to Desdemona would
half have corrupted a votarist: you have told me she hath
received them, and returned me expectations and comforts of
sudden respect and acquaintance; but I find none.

IAGO.
Well; go to; very well.

RODERIGO.
Very well! go to! I cannot go to, man; nor 'tis not very well:
nay, I say 'tis very scurvy, and begin to find myself fobbed
in it.

IAGO.
Very well.

RODERIGO.
I tell you 'tis not very well. I will make myself known to
Desdemona: if she will return me my jewels, I will give over
my suit and repent my unlawful solicitation; if not, assure
yourself I will seek satisfaction of you.

IAGO.
You have said now.

RODERIGO.
Ay, and said nothing but what I protest intendment of doing.

IAGO.
Why, now I see there's mettle in thee; and even from this
instant do build on thee a better opinion than ever before.
Give me thy hand, Roderigo. Thou hast taken against me a most
just exception; but yet, I protest, I have dealt most directly
in thy affair.

RODERIGO.
It hath not appeared.

IAGO.
I grant indeed it hath not appeared, and your suspicion is not
without wit and judgement. But, Roderigo, if thou hast that in
thee indeed, which I have greater reason to believe now than
ever,--I mean purpose, courage, and valour,--this night show
it: if thou the next night following enjoy not Desdemona, take
me from this world with treachery and devise engines for my
life.

RODERIGO.
Well, what is it? is it within reason and compass?

IAGO.
Sir, there is especial commission come from Venice to depute
Cassio in Othello's place.

RODERIGO.
Is that true? why then Othello and Desdemona return again to
Venice.

IAGO.
O, no; he goes into Mauritania, and takes away with him the
fair Desdemona, unless his abode be lingered here by some
accident: wherein none can be so determinate as the removing
of Cassio.

RODERIGO.
How do you mean "removing" of him?

IAGO.
Why, by making him uncapable of Othello's place;--knocking
out his brains.

RODERIGO.
And that you would have me to do?

IAGO.
Ay, if you dare do yourself a profit and a right. He sups
to-night with a harlotry, and thither will I go to him:--he
knows not yet of his honourable fortune. If you will watch his
going thence,--which I will fashion to fall out between twelve
and one,--you may take him at your pleasure: I will be near to
second your attempt, and he shall fall between us. Come, stand
not amazed at it, but go along with me; I will show you such a
necessity in his death that you shall think yourself bound to
put it on him. It is now high supper-time, and the night grows to
waste: about it.

RODERIGO.
I will hear further reason for this.

IAGO.
And you shall be satisfied.

[Exeunt.]



SCENE III. Cyprus. Another Room in the Castle.

[Enter Othello, Lodovico, Desdemona, Emilia, and Attendants.]

LODOVICO.
I do beseech you, sir, trouble yourself no further.

OTHELLO.
O, pardon me; 'twill do me good to walk.

LODOVICO.
Madam, good night; I humbly thank your ladyship.

DESDEMONA.
Your honour is most welcome.

OTHELLO.
Will you walk, sir?--
O,--Desdemona,--

DESDEMONA.
My lord?

OTHELLO.
Get you to bed on the instant; I will be returned
forthwith: dismiss your attendant there: look't be done.

DESDEMONA.
I will, my lord.

[Exeunt Othello, Lodovico, and Attendants.]

EMILIA.
How goes it now? he looks gentler than he did.

DESDEMONA.
He says he will return incontinent:
He hath commanded me to go to bed,
And bade me to dismiss you.

EMILIA.
Dismiss me!

DESDEMONA.
It was his bidding; therefore, good Emilia,
Give me my nightly wearing, and adieu:
We must not now displease him.

EMILIA.
I would you had never seen him!

DESDEMONA.
So would not I: my love doth so approve him,
That even his stubbornness, his checks, his frowns,--
Pr'ythee, unpin me,--have grace and favour in them.

EMILIA.
I have laid those sheets you bade me on the bed.

DESDEMONA.
All's one.--Good faith, how foolish are our minds!--
If I do die before thee, pr'ythee, shroud me
In one of those same sheets.

EMILIA.
Come, come, you talk.

DESDEMONA.
My mother had a maid call'd Barbara;
She was in love; and he she lov'd prov'd mad
And did forsake her: she had a song of "willow";
An old thing 'twas, but it express'd her fortune,
And she died singing it: that song to-night
Will not go from my mind; I have much to do
But to go hang my head all at one side,
And sing it like poor Barbara. Pr'ythee, despatch.

EMILIA.
Shall I go fetch your night-gown?

DESDEMONA.
No, unpin me here.--
This Lodovico is a proper man.

EMILIA.
A very handsome man.

DESDEMONA.
He speaks well.

EMILIA.
I know a lady in Venice would have walked barefoot to
Palestine for a touch of his nether lip.

DESDEMONA.
[Sings.]
  "The poor soul sat sighing by a sycamore tree,
    Sing all a green willow;
  Her hand on her bosom, her head on her knee,
    Sing willow, willow, willow:
  The fresh streams ran by her, and murmur'd her moans;
    Sing willow, willow, willow;
  Her salt tears fell from her, and soften'd the stones;--"

Lay by these:--

[Sings.] 
    "Sing willow, willow, willow;--"

Pr'ythee, hie thee; he'll come anon:--

[Sings.]
  "Sing all a green willow must be my garland.
    Let nobody blame him; his scorn I approve,--"

Nay, that's not next.--Hark! who is't that knocks?

EMILIA.
It's the wind.

DESDEMONA.
[Sings.]
  "I call'd my love false love; but what said he then?
    Sing willow, willow, willow:
  'If I court mo women, you'll couch with mo men.'"

So get thee gone; good night. Mine eyes do itch;
Doth that bode weeping?

EMILIA.
'Tis neither here nor there.

DESDEMONA.
I have heard it said so.--O, these men, these men!--
Dost thou in conscience think,--tell me, Emilia,--
That there be women do abuse their husbands
In such gross kind?

EMILIA.
There be some such, no question.

DESDEMONA.
Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world?

EMILIA.
Why, would not you?

DESDEMONA.
No, by this heavenly light!

EMILIA.
Nor I neither by this heavenly light; I might do't as well
i' the dark.

DESDEMONA.
Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world?

EMILIA.
The world's a huge thing; it is a great price
For a small vice.

DESDEMONA.
In troth, I think thou wouldst not.

EMILIA.
In troth, I think I should; and undo't when I had done. Marry,
I would not do such a thing for a joint-ring, nor for measures
of lawn, nor for gowns, petticoats, nor caps, nor any petty
exhibition; but, for the whole world--why, who would not make
her husband a cuckold to make him a monarch? I should venture
purgatory for't.

DESDEMONA.
Beshrew me, if I would do such a wrong for the whole world.

EMILIA.
Why, the wrong is but a wrong i' the world; and having the
world for your labour, 'tis a wrong in your own world, and you
might quickly make it right.

DESDEMONA.
I do not think there is any such woman.

EMILIA.
Yes, a dozen; and as many to the vantage as would store
the world they play'd for.
But I do think it is their husbands' faults
If wives do fall: say that they slack their duties
And pour our treasures into foreign laps;
Or else break out in peevish jealousies,
Throwing restraint upon us; or say they strike us,
Or scant our former having in despite;
Why, we have galls; and though we have some grace,
Yet have we some revenge. Let husbands know
Their wives have sense like them: they see and smell
And have their palates both for sweet and sour,
As husbands have. What is it that they do
When they change us for others? Is it sport?
I think it is: and doth affection breed it?
I think it doth: is't frailty that thus errs?
It is so too. And have not we affections,
Desires for sport, and frailty, as men have?
Then let them use us well: else let them know
The ills we do their ills instruct us so.

DESDEMONA.
Good-night, good-night: heaven me such usage send,
Not to pick bad from bad, but by bad mend!

[Exeunt.]



ACT V.

SCENE I. Cyprus. A Street.

[Enter Iago and Roderigo.]

IAGO.
Here, stand behind this bulk; straight will he come:
Wear thy good rapier bare, and put it home:
Quick, quick; fear nothing; I'll be at thy elbow:
It makes us, or it mars us; think on that,
And fix most firm thy resolution.

RODERIGO.
Be near at hand; I may miscarry in't.

IAGO.
Here, at thy hand: be bold, and take thy stand.

[Retires to a little distance.]

RODERIGO.
I have no great devotion to the deed;
And yet he hath given me satisfying reasons:--
'Tis but a man gone.--Forth, my sword; he dies.

[Goes to his stand.]

IAGO.
I have rubb'd this young quat almost to the sense,
And he grows angry. Now, whether he kill Cassio,
Or Cassio him, or each do kill the other,
Every way makes my gain: live Roderigo,
He calls me to a restitution large
Of gold and jewels that I bobb'd from him,
As gifts to Desdemona;
It must not be: if Cassio do remain,
He hath a daily beauty in his life
That makes me ugly; and besides, the Moor
May unfold me to him; there stand I in much peril;
No, he must die.--But, so, I hear him coming.

[Enter Cassio.]

RODERIGO.
I know his gait; 'tis he.--Villain, thou diest!

[Rushes out, and makes a pass at Cassio.]

CASSIO.
That thrust had been mine enemy indeed,
But that my coat is better than thou know'st:
I will make proof of thine.

[Draws, and wounds Roderigo.]

RODERIGO.
O, I am slain!

[Iago rushes from his post, cuts Cassio behind in the leg, and
exit.]

CASSIO.
I am maim'd forever.--Help, ho! murder! murder!

[Falls.]

[Enter Othello at a distance.]

OTHELLO.
The voice of Cassio: Iago keeps his word.

RODERIGO.
O, villain that I am!

OTHELLO.
It is even so.

CASSIO.
O, help, ho! light! a surgeon!

OTHELLO.
'Tis he:--O brave Iago, honest and just,
That hast such noble sense of thy friend's wrong!
Thou teachest me,--minion, your dear lies dead,
And your unbless'd fate hies. Strumpet, I come!
Forth of my heart those charms, thine eyes, are blotted;
Thy bed, lust-stain'd, shall with lust's blood be spotted.

[Exit.]

[Enter Lodovico and Gratiano at a distance.]

CASSIO.
What, ho! no watch? no passage? murder! murder!

GRATIANO.
'Tis some mischance; the cry is very direful.

CASSIO.
O, help!

LODOVICO.
Hark!

RODERIGO.
O wretched villain!

LODOVICO.
Two or three groan:--it is a heavy night:
These may be counterfeits: let's think't unsafe
To come in to the cry without more help.

RODERIGO.
Nobody come? then shall I bleed to death.

LODOVICO.
Hark!

[Re-enter Iago, with a light.]

GRATIANO.
Here's one comes in his shirt, with light and weapons.

IAGO.
Who's there? whose noise is this that cries on murder?

LODOVICO.
We do not know.

IAGO.
Did not you hear a cry?

CASSIO.
Here, here! for heaven's sake, help me!

IAGO.
What's the matter?

GRATIANO.
This is Othello's ancient, as I take it.

LODOVICO.
The same indeed; a very valiant fellow.

IAGO.
What are you here that cry so grievously?

CASSIO.
Iago? O, I am spoil'd, undone by villains!
Give me some help.

IAGO.
O me, lieutenant! what villains have done this?

CASSIO.
I think that one of them is hereabout,
And cannot make away.

IAGO.
O treacherous villains!--
[To Lodovico and Gratiano.] What are you there?
Come in and give some help.

RODERIGO.
O, help me here!

CASSIO.
That's one of them.

IAGO.
O murderous slave! O villain!

[Stabs Roderigo.]

RODERIGO.
O damn'd Iago! O inhuman dog!

IAGO.
Kill men i' the dark!--Where be these bloody thieves?--
How silent is this town!--Ho! murder! murder!--
What may you be? are you of good or evil?

LODOVICO.
As you shall prove us, praise us.

IAGO.
Signior Lodovico?

LODOVICO.
He, sir.

IAGO.
I cry you mercy. Here's Cassio hurt by villains.

GRATIANO.
Cassio!

IAGO.
How is't, brother?

CASSIO.
My leg is cut in two.

IAGO.
Marry, heaven forbid!--
Light, gentlemen:--I'll bind it with my shirt.

[Enter Bianca.]

BIANCA.
What is the matter, ho? who is't that cried?

IAGO.
Who is't that cried!

BIANCA.
O my dear Cassio, my sweet Cassio! O Cassio, Cassio, Cassio!

IAGO.
O notable strumpet!--Cassio, may you suspect
Who they should be that have thus mangled you?

CASSIO.
No.

GRATIANO.
I am sorry to find you thus: I have been to seek you.

IAGO.
Lend me a garter:--so.--O, for a chair,
To bear him easily hence!

BIANCA.
Alas, he faints!--O Cassio, Cassio, Cassio!

IAGO.
Gentlemen all, I do suspect this trash
To be a party in this injury.--
Patience awhile, good Cassio.--Come, come;
Lend me a light.--Know we this face or no?
Alas, my friend and my dear countryman
Roderigo? no:--yes, sure; O heaven! Roderigo.

GRATIANO.
What, of Venice?

IAGO.
Even he, sir: did you know him?

GRATIANO.
Know him! ay.

IAGO.
Signior Gratiano? I cry you gentle pardon;
These bloody accidents must excuse my manners,
That so neglected you.

GRATIANO.
I am glad to see you.

IAGO.
How do you, Cassio?--O, a chair, a chair!

GRATIANO.
Roderigo!

IAGO.
He, he, 'tis he.-- [A chair brought in.] O, that's well said;
--the chair:--
Some good man bear him carefully from hence;
I'll fetch the general's surgeon. [To Bianca.] For you, mistress,
Save you your labour.--He that lies slain here, Cassio,
Was my dear friend: what malice was between you?

CASSIO.
None in the world; nor do I know the man.

IAGO.
[To Bianca.] What, look you pale?--O, bear him out o' the air.

[Cassio and Roderigo are borne off.]

Stay you, good gentlemen.--Look you pale, mistress?--
Do you perceive the gastness of her eye?--
Nay, if you stare, we shall hear more anon.--
Behold her well; I pray you, look upon her:
Do you see, gentlemen? nay, guiltiness will speak
Though tongues were out of use.

[Enter Emilia.]

EMILIA.
'Las, what's the matter? what's the matter, husband?

IAGO.
Cassio hath here been set on in the dark
By Roderigo, and fellows that are 'scap'd:
He's almost slain, and Roderigo dead.

EMILIA.
Alas, good gentleman! alas, good Cassio!

IAGO.
This is the fruit of whoring.--Pr'ythee, Emilia,
Go know of Cassio where he supp'd to-night.--
What, do you shake at that?

BIANCA.
He supp'd at my house; but I therefore shake not.

IAGO.
O, did he so? I charge you, go with me.

EMILIA.
Fie, fie upon thee, strumpet!

BIANCA.
I am no strumpet, but of life as honest
As you that thus abuse me.

EMILIA.
As I! foh! fie upon thee!

IAGO.
Kind gentlemen, let's go see poor Cassio dress'd.--
Come, mistress, you must tell's another tale.--
Emilia, run you to the citadel,
And tell my lord and lady what hath happ'd.--
Will you go on afore? [Aside.] This is the night
That either makes me or fordoes me quite.

[Exeunt.]



SCENE II. Cyprus. A Bedchamber in the castle: Desdemona in bed
asleep; a light burning.

[Enter Othello.]

OTHELLO.
It is the cause, it is the cause, my soul,--
Let me not name it to you, you chaste stars!--
It is the cause.--Yet I'll not shed her blood;
Nor scar that whiter skin of hers than snow,
And smooth as monumental alabaster.

[Takes off his sword.]

Yet she must die, else she'll betray more men.
Put out the light, and then put out the light:
If I quench thee, thou flaming minister,
I can again thy former light restore,
Should I repent me:--but once put out thy light,
Thou cunning'st pattern of excelling nature,
I know not where is that Promethean heat
That can thy light relume. When I have pluck'd thy rose,
I cannot give it vital growth again,
It must needs wither:--I'll smell it on the tree.--

[Kissing her.]

O, balmy breath, that dost almost persuade
Justice to break her sword!--One more, one more;--
Be thus when thou art dead, and I will kill thee,
And love thee after.--One more, and this the last;
So sweet was ne'er so fatal. I must weep,
But they are cruel tears: this sorrow's heavenly;
It strikes where it doth love.--She wakes.

DESDEMONA.
Who's there? Othello?

OTHELLO.
Ay, Desdemona.

DESDEMONA.
Will you come to bed, my lord?

OTHELLO.
Have you pray'd to-night, Desdemona?

DESDEMONA.
Ay, my lord.

OTHELLO.
If you bethink yourself of any crime
Unreconcil'd as yet to heaven and grace,
Solicit for it straight.

DESDEMONA.
Alack, my lord, what may you mean by that?

OTHELLO.
Well, do it, and be brief; I will walk by.
I would not kill thy unprepared spirit;
No,--heaven forfend!--I would not kill thy soul.

DESDEMONA.
Talk you of killing?

OTHELLO.
Ay, I do.

DESDEMONA.
Then heaven have mercy on me!

OTHELLO.
Amen, with all my heart!

DESDEMONA.
If you say so, I hope you will not kill me.

OTHELLO.
Hum!

DESDEMONA.
And yet I fear you; for you are fatal then
When your eyes roll so: why I should fear I know not,
Since guiltiness I know not; but yet I feel I fear.

OTHELLO.
Think on thy sins.

DESDEMONA.
They are loves I bear to you.

OTHELLO.
Ay, and for that thou diest.

DESDEMONA.
That death's unnatural that kills for loving.--
Alas, why gnaw you so your nether lip?
Some bloody passion shakes your very frame:
These are portents; but yet I hope, I hope,
They do not point on me.

OTHELLO.
Peace, and be still!

DESDEMONA.
I will so. What's the matter?

OTHELLO.
That handkerchief which I so loved and gave thee
Thou gav'st to Cassio.

DESDEMONA.
No, by my life and soul!
Send for the man, and ask him.

OTHELLO.
Sweet soul, take heed,
Take heed of perjury; thou'rt on thy death-bed.

DESDEMONA.
Ay, but not yet to die.

OTHELLO.
Yes, presently:
Therefore confess thee freely of thy sin;
For to deny each article with oath
Cannot remove nor choke the strong conception
That I do groan withal. Thou art to die.

DESDEMONA.
Then, Lord have mercy on me!

OTHELLO.
I say, amen.

DESDEMONA.
And have you mercy too!--I never did
Offend you in my life; never lov'd Cassio
But with such general warranty of heaven
As I might love: I never gave him token.

OTHELLO.
By heaven, I saw my handkerchief in 's hand.
O perjur'd woman! thou dost stone my heart,
And mak'st me call what I intend to do
A murder, which I thought a sacrifice:
I saw the handkerchief.

DESDEMONA.
He found it then;
I never gave it him:--send for him hither;
Let him confess a truth.

OTHELLO.
He hath confess'd.

DESDEMONA.
What, my lord?

OTHELLO.
That he hath us'd thee.

DESDEMONA.
How? unlawfully?

OTHELLO.
Ay.

DESDEMONA.
He will not say so.

OTHELLO.
No, his mouth is stopp'd;
Honest Iago hath ta'en order for't.

DESDEMONA.
O, my fear interprets!--What, is he dead?

OTHELLO.
Had all his hairs been lives, my great revenge
Had stomach for them all.

DESDEMONA.
Alas, he is betray'd, and I undone!

OTHELLO.
Out, strumpet! Weep'st thou for him to my face?

DESDEMONA.
O, banish me, my lord, but kill me not!

OTHELLO.
Down, strumpet!

DESDEMONA.
Kill me to-morrow; let me live to-night!

OTHELLO.
Nay, if you strive,--

DESDEMONA.
But half an hour!

OTHELLO.
Being done, there is no pause.

DESDEMONA.
But while I say one prayer!

OTHELLO.
It is too late.

[Smothers her.]

EMILIA.
[Within.] My lord, my lord! what, ho! my lord, my lord!

OTHELLO.
What noise is this?--Not dead? not yet quite dead?
I that am cruel am yet merciful;
I would not have thee linger in thy pain:--
So, so.

EMILIA.
[Within.] What, ho! my lord, my lord!

OTHELLO.
Who's there?

EMILIA.
[Within.] O, good my lord, I would speak a word with you!

OTHELLO.
Yes:--'tis Emilia:--by and by.--She's dead.--
'Tis like she comes to speak of Cassio's death;
The noise was high.--Ha! no more moving?
Still as the grave.--Shall she come in?--Were't good?--
I think she stirs again:--no.--What's best to do?
If she come in, she'll sure speak to my wife:
My wife! my wife! what wife? I have no wife.
O, insupportable! O heavy hour!
Methinks it should be now a huge eclipse
Of sun and moon, and that the affrighted globe
Should yawn at alteration.

EMILIA.
[Within.] I do beseech you
That I may speak with you, O, good my lord!

OTHELLO.
I had forgot thee: O, come in, Emilia:--
Soft,--by and by:--let me the curtains draw.--
Where art thou? 

[Unlocks the door.]

[Enter Emilia.]

What's the matter with thee now?

EMILIA.
O, my good lord, yonder's foul murders done!

OTHELLO.
What, now?

EMILIA.
But now, my lord.

OTHELLO.
It is the very error of the moon;
She comes more nearer earth than she was wont
And makes men mad.

EMILIA.
Cassio, my lord, hath kill'd a young Venetian
Call'd Roderigo.

OTHELLO.
Roderigo kill'd?
And Cassio kill'd?

EMILIA.
No, Cassio is not kill'd.

OTHELLO.
Not Cassio kill'd! then murder's out of tune,
And sweet revenge grows harsh.

DESDEMONA.
O, falsely, falsely murder'd!

EMILIA.
Alas, what cry is that?

OTHELLO.
That! what?

EMILIA.
Out, and alas! That was my lady's voice.--
Help! help, ho! help!--O lady, speak again!
Sweet Desdemona! O sweet mistress, speak!

DESDEMONA.
A guiltless death I die.

EMILIA.
O, who hath done this deed?

DESDEMONA.
Nobody; I myself. Farewell:
Commend me to my kind lord: O, farewell!

[Dies.]

OTHELLO.
Why, how should she be murder'd?

EMILIA.
Alas, who knows?

OTHELLO.
You heard her say herself it was not I.

EMILIA.
She said so: I must needs report the truth.

OTHELLO.
She's like a liar, gone to burning hell:
'Twas I that kill'd her.

EMILIA.
O, the more angel she,
And you the blacker devil!

OTHELLO.
She turn'd to folly, and she was a whore.

EMILIA.
Thou dost belie her, and thou art a devil.

OTHELLO.
She was false as water.

EMILIA.
Thou art rash as fire, to say
That she was false: O, she was heavenly true!

OTHELLO.
Cassio did tup her; ask thy husband else.
O, I were damn'd beneath all depth in hell,
But that I did proceed upon just grounds
To this extremity. Thy husband knew it all.

EMILIA.
My husband!

OTHELLO.
Thy husband.

EMILIA.
That she was false to wedlock?

OTHELLO.
Ay, with Cassio. Nay, had she been true,
If heaven would make me such another world
Of one entire and perfect chrysolite,
I'd not have sold her for it.

EMILIA.
My husband!

OTHELLO.
Ay, 'twas he that told me first:
An honest man he is, and hates the slime
That sticks on filthy deeds.

EMILIA.
My husband!

OTHELLO.
What needs this iterance, woman? I say thy husband.

EMILIA.
O mistress, villainy hath made mocks with love!--
My husband say that she was false!

OTHELLO.
He, woman;
I say thy husband: dost understand the word?
My friend, thy husband, honest, honest Iago.

EMILIA.
If he say so, may his pernicious soul
Rot half a grain a day! he lies to the heart:
She was too fond of her most filthy bargain.

OTHELLO.
Ha!

EMILIA.
Do thy worst:
This deed of thine is no more worthy heaven
Than thou wast worthy her.

OTHELLO.
Peace, you were best.

EMILIA.
Thou hast not half that power to do me harm
As I have to be hurt. O gull! O dolt!
As ignorant as dirt! thou hast done a deed,--
I care not for thy sword; I'll make thee known,
Though I lost twenty lives.--Help! help, ho! help!
The Moor hath kill'd my mistress! murder, murder!

[Enter Montano, Gratiano, and Iago.]

MONTANO.
What is the matter?--How now, general!

EMILIA.
O, are you come, Iago? you have done well,
That men must lay their murders on your neck.

GRATIANO.
What is the matter?

EMILIA.
Disprove this villain, if thou be'st a man:
He says thou told'st him that his wife was false:
I know thou didst not, thou'rt not such a villain:
Speak, for my heart is full.

IAGO.
I told him what I thought; and told no more
Than what he found himself was apt and true.

EMILIA.
But did you ever tell him she was false?

IAGO.
I did.

EMILIA.
You told a lie; an odious, damned lie;
Upon my soul, a lie; a wicked lie:--
She false with Cassio!--Did you say with Cassio?

IAGO.
With Cassio, mistress. Go to, charm your tongue.

EMILIA.
I will not charm my tongue; I am bound to speak:
My mistress here lies murder'd in her bed,--

ALL.
O heavens forfend!

EMILIA.
And your reports have set the murder on.

OTHELLO.
Nay, stare not, masters: it is true, indeed.

GRATIANO.
'Tis a strange truth.

MONTANO.
O monstrous act!

EMILIA.
Villany, villany, villany!
I think upon't,--I think,--I smell't;--O villany!--
I thought so then;--I'll kill myself for grief:--
O villany, villany!

IAGO.
What, are you mad? I charge you, get you home.

EMILIA.
Good gentlemen, let me have leave to speak:
'Tis proper I obey him, but not now.--
Perchance, Iago, I will ne'er go home.

OTHELLO.
O! O! O! 

[Hanging over his wife.]

EMILIA.
Nay, lay thee down and roar;
For thou hast kill'd the sweetest innocent
That e'er did lift up eye.

OTHELLO.
[Rising.] O, she was foul!--
I scarce did know you, uncle; there lies your niece,
Whose breath, indeed, these hands have newly stopp'd:
I know this act shows horrible and grim.

GRATIANO.
Poor Desdemona! I am glad thy father's dead:
Thy match was mortal to him, and pure grief
Shore his old thread in twain: did he live now,
This sight would make him do a desperate turn,
Yea, curse his better angel from his side,
And fall to reprobance.

OTHELLO.
'Tis pitiful; but yet Iago knows
That she with Cassio hath the act of shame
A thousand times committed; Cassio confess'd it:
And she did gratify his amorous works
With that recognizance and pledge of love
Which I first gave her; I saw it in his hand:
It was a handkerchief, an antique token
My father gave my mother.

EMILIA.
O heaven! O heavenly powers!

IAGO.
Come, hold your peace.

EMILIA.
'Twill out, 'twill out:--I peace!
No, I will speak as liberal as the north:
Let heaven and men and devils, let them all,
All, all, cry shame against me, yet I'll speak.

IAGO.
Be wise, and get you home.

EMILIA.
I will not.

[Iago offers to stab his wife.]

GRATIANO.
Fie!
Your sword upon a woman?

EMILIA.
O thou dull Moor! that handkerchief thou speak'st of
I found by fortune and did give my husband;
For often with a solemn earnestness,--
More than, indeed, belong'd to such a trifle,--
He begg'd of me to steal it.

IAGO.
Villanous whore!

EMILIA.
She give it Cassio! no, alas, I found it,
And I did give't my husband.

IAGO.
Filth, thou liest!

EMILIA.
By heaven, I do not, I do not, gentlemen.--
O murderous coxcomb! What should such a fool
Do with so good a wife?

OTHELLO.
Are there not stones in heaven
But what serve for thunder?--Precious villain!

[Iago stabs Emilia, and then runs out.]

GRATIANO.
The woman falls; sure, he hath kill'd his wife.

EMILIA.
Ay, ay:--O, lay me by my mistress' side.

GRATIANO.
He's gone, but his wife's kill'd.

MONTANO.
'Tis a notorious villain. Take you this weapon,
Which I have here recover'd from the Moor:
Come, guard the door without; let him not pass,
But kill him rather. I'll after that same villain,
For 'tis a damned slave.

[Exit Montano and Gratiano.]

OTHELLO.
I am not valiant neither,
But every puny whipster gets my sword:--
But why should honour outlive honesty?
Let it go all.

EMILIA.
What did thy song bode, lady?
Hark, canst thou hear me? I will play the swan,
And die in music:--

[Sings.] "Willow, willow, willow."

Moor, she was chaste; she lov'd thee, cruel Moor;
So come my soul to bliss, as I speak true;
So speaking as I think, I die,--I die.

[Dies.]

OTHELLO.
I have another weapon in this chamber;
It is a sword of Spain, the ice-brook's temper:--
O, here it is.--Uncle, I must come forth.

GRATIANO.
[Within.] If thou attempt it, it will cost thee dear:
Thou hast no weapon, and perforce must suffer.

OTHELLO.
Look in upon me then, and speak with me,
Or, naked as I am, I will assault thee.

[Re-enter Gratiano.]

GRATIANO.
What is the matter?

OTHELLO.
Behold, I have a weapon;
A better never did itself sustain
Upon a soldier's thigh: I have seen the day
That with this little arm and this good sword
I have made my way through more impediments
Than twenty times your stop:--but, O vain boast!
Who can control his fate? 'tis not so now.--
Be not afraid, though you do see me weapon'd;
Here is my journey's end, here is my butt,
And very sea-mark of my utmost sail.
Do you go back dismay'd? 'tis a lost fear;
Man but a rush against Othello's breast,
And he retires:--where should Othello go?--
Now, how dost thou look now? O ill-starr'd wench!
Pale as thy smock! When we shall meet at compt,
This look of thine will hurl my soul from heaven,
And fiends will snatch at it. Cold, cold, my girl!
Even like thy chastity.--
O cursed, cursed slave!--Whip me, ye devils,
From the possession of this heavenly sight!
Blow me about in winds! roast me in sulphur!
Wash me in steep-down gulfs of liquid fire!--
O Desdemon! dead, Desdemon! dead! O!

[Enter Lodovico, Montano, Cassio carried in a chair,
and Officers with Iago prisoner.]

LODOVICO.
Where is this rash and most unfortunate man?

OTHELLO.
That's he that was Othello;--here I am.

LODOVICO.
Where is that viper? bring the villain forth.

OTHELLO.
I look down towards his feet;--but that's a fable.--
If that thou be'st a devil, I cannot kill thee.

[Wounds Iago.]

LODOVICO.
Wrench his sword from him.

IAGO.
I bleed, sir, but not kill'd.

OTHELLO.
I am not sorry neither: I'd have thee live;
For, in my sense, 'tis happiness to die.

LODOVICO.
O thou Othello, that wert once so good,
Fall'n in the practice of a damned slave,
What shall be said to thee?

OTHELLO.
Why, anything;
An honourable murderer, if you will;
For naught did I in hate, but all in honour.

LODOVICO.
This wretch hath part confess'd his villany:
Did you and he consent in Cassio's death?

OTHELLO.
Ay.

CASSIO.
Dear general, I never gave you cause.

OTHELLO.
I do believe it, and I ask your pardon.
Will you, I pray, demand that demi-devil
Why he hath thus ensnar'd my soul and body?

IAGO.
Demand me nothing: what you know, you know:
From this time forth I never will speak word.

LODOVICO.
What, not to pray?

GRATIANO.
Torments will ope your lips.

OTHELLO.
Well, thou dost best.

LODOVICO.
Sir, you shall understand what hath befall'n,
Which, as I think, you know not. Here is a letter
Found in the pocket of the slain Roderigo,
And here another: the one of them imports
The death of Cassio to be undertook
By Roderigo.

OTHELLO.
O villain!

CASSIO.
Most heathenish and most gross!

LODOVICO.
Now here's another discontented paper,
Found in his pocket too; and this, it seems,
Roderigo meant to have sent this damned villain;
But that, belike, Iago in the interim
Came in and satisfied him.

OTHELLO.
O the pernicious caitiff!--
How came you, Cassio, by that handkerchief
That was my wife's?

CASSIO.
I found it in my chamber;
And he himself confess'd but even now
That there he dropp'd it for a special purpose
Which wrought to his desire.

OTHELLO.
O fool! fool! fool!

CASSIO.
There is besides in Roderigo's letter,--
How he upbraids Iago, that he made him
Brave me upon the watch; whereon it came
That I was cast: and even but now he spake,
After long seeming dead,--Iago hurt him,
Iago set him on.

LODOVICO.
You must forsake this room, and go with us:
Your power and your command is taken off,
And Cassio rules in Cyprus. For this slave,--
If there be any cunning cruelty
That can torment him much and hold him long,
It shall be his. You shall close prisoner rest,
Till that the nature of your fault be known
To the Venetian state.--Come, bring away.

OTHELLO.
Soft you; a word or two before you go.
I have done the state some service, and they know't.--
No more of that.--I pray you, in your letters,
When you shall these unlucky deeds relate,
Speak of me as I am; nothing extenuate,
Nor set down aught in malice: then must you speak
Of one that loved not wisely, but too well;
Of one not easily jealous, but, being wrought,
Perplex'd in the extreme; of one whose hand,
Like the base Judean, threw a pearl away
Richer than all his tribe; of one whose subdu'd eyes,
Albeit unused to the melting mood,
Drop tears as fast as the Arabian trees
Their medicinal gum. Set you down this;
And say besides,--that in Aleppo once,
Where a malignant and a turban'd Turk
Beat a Venetian and traduc'd the state,
I took by the throat the circumcised dog
And smote him--thus.

[Stabs himself.]

LODOVICO.
O bloody period!

GRATIANO.
All that's spoke is marr'd.

OTHELLO.
I kiss'd thee ere I kill'd thee:--no way but this,
Killing myself, to die upon a kiss. [Falling upom Desdemona.]

CASSIO.
This did I fear, but thought he had no weapon;
For he was great of heart.
 
LODOVICO.
[To Iago.] O Spartan dog,
More fell than anguish, hunger, or the sea!
Look on the tragic loading of this bed;
This is thy work:--the object poisons sight;
Let it be hid.--Gratiano, keep the house,
And seize upon the fortunes of the Moor,
For they succeed on you.--To you, lord governor,
Remains the censure of this hellish villain;
The time, the place, the torture,--O, enforce it!
Myself will straight aboard; and to the state
This heavy act with heavy heart relate.

[Exeunt.]


THE END





End of Project Gutenberg Etext of Othello by Shakespeare
PG has multiple editions of William Shakespeare's Complete Works




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK, OTHELLO, THE MOOR OF VENICE ***

This file should be named 2ws3210.txt or 2ws3210.zip
Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks get a new NUMBER, 2ws3211.txt
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, 2ws3210a.txt

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the US
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we usually do not
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

We are now trying to release all our eBooks one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
even years after the official publication date.

Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg eBooks is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.

Most people start at our Web sites at:
http://gutenberg.net or
http://promo.net/pg

These Web sites include award-winning information about Project
Gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new
eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!).


Those of you who want to download any eBook before announcement
can get to them as follows, and just download by date.  This is
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext05 or
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext05

Or /etext04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92,
91 or 90

Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
as it appears in our Newsletters.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any eBook selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.   Our
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If the value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour in 2002 as we release over 100 new text
files per month:  1240 more eBooks in 2001 for a total of 4000+
We are already on our way to trying for 2000 more eBooks in 2002
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
will reach over half a trillion eBooks given away by year's end.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away 1 Trillion eBooks!
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.

Here is the briefest record of our progress (* means estimated):

eBooks Year Month

    1  1971 July
   10  1991 January
  100  1994 January
 1000  1997 August
 1500  1998 October
 2000  1999 December
 2500  2000 December
 3000  2001 November
 4000  2001 October/November
 6000  2002 December*
 9000  2003 November*
10000  2004 January*


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.

We need your donations more than ever!

As of February, 2002, contributions are being solicited from people
and organizations in: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut,
Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts,
Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,
Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South
Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West
Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.

We have filed in all 50 states now, but these are the only ones
that have responded.

As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list
will be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states.
Please feel free to ask to check the status of your state.

In answer to various questions we have received on this:

We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally
request donations in all 50 states.  If your state is not listed and
you would like to know if we have added it since the list you have,
just ask.

While we cannot solicit donations from people in states where we are
not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accepting
donations from donors in these states who approach us with an offer to
donate.

International donations are accepted, but we don't know ANYTHING about
how to make them tax-deductible, or even if they CAN be made
deductible, and don't have the staff to handle it even if there are
ways.

Donations by check or money order may be sent to:

 PROJECT GUTENBERG LITERARY ARCHIVE FOUNDATION
 809 North 1500 West
 Salt Lake City, UT 84116

Contact us if you want to arrange for a wire transfer or payment
method other than by check or money order.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been approved by
the US Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization with EIN
[Employee Identification Number] 64-622154.  Donations are
tax-deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law.  As fund-raising
requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be
made and fund-raising will begin in the additional states.

We need your donations more than ever!

You can get up to date donation information online at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html


***

If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
you can always email directly to:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.

We would prefer to send you information by email.


**The Legal Small Print**


(Three Pages)

***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here? You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this eBook, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault. So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you. It also tells you how
you may distribute copies of this eBook if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS EBOOK
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
eBook, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement. If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this eBook by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from. If you received this eBook on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM EBOOKS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBooks,
is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart
through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this eBook
under the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
any commercial products without permission.

To create these eBooks, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works. Despite these efforts, the Project's eBooks and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects". Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other eBook medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] Michael Hart and the Foundation (and any other party you may
receive this eBook from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook) disclaims
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this eBook within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from. If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy. If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS EBOOK IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS". NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE EBOOK OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this eBook,
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the eBook,
or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this eBook electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     eBook or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this eBook in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The eBook, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The eBook may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the eBook (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          eBook in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the eBook refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.

The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com

[Portions of this eBook's header and trailer may be reprinted only
when distributed free of all fees.  Copyright (C) 2001, 2002 by
Michael S. Hart.  Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be
used in any sales of Project Gutenberg eBooks or other materials be
they hardware or software or any other related product without
express permission.]

*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS*Ver.02/11/02*END* 

WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE'S

                       ROMEO & JULIET

   ADAPTED FOR THE SCREEN BY CRAIG PEARCE AND BAZ LUHRMANN


























                                       FINAL SHOOTING SCRIPT

                                             October 6, 1995




EXT.  HIGHWAY.  AFTERNOON.

A ribbon of freeway stretching into a blue and pink late
afternoon sky. A huge dark sedan, windows tinted gold,
headlights blazing, powers directly for us.

CUT TO: A heavy, low-slung, pickup truck traveling toward
the sedan.

WIDE SHOT: Sky, freeway, the cars closing.

TIGHT ON: The sedan.

TIGHT ON: The pickup.

Like thunderous, jousting opponents, the cars pass in a
deafening cacophony of noise.

INT.  TRUCK.  AFTERNOON.

TIGHT ON: The fat face of GREGORY, yelling at the
disappearing sedan.

                         GREGORY
            A dog of the house of Capulet moves
            me!

He and the pimply-faced front-seat passenger, SAMPSON,
explode with laughter.

The red-haired driver BENVOLIO, keeps his eyes on the road.

EXT.  EXIT RAMP.  AFTERNOON.

The truck spirals down an exit ramp and screeches into busy
driveway of a large gas station.

EXT.  GAS STATION.  AFTERNOON.

Attendants immediately run to the truck.  Two clean
windshields and duco, the third fills the gas tank.

INT.  TRUCK.  AFTERNOON.

Gregory in the back seat is boasting outrageously.

                         GREGORY
            A dog of that house shall move me
            to stand.  I will take the wall of
            any man or maid of Capulets.

Sampson, sarcastically.

                         SAMPSON
            That shows thee a weak slave.  For
            the weakest goes to the wall.

                         GREGORY
            'Tis true; and therefore women,
            being the weaker vessels, are ever
            thrust to the wall.  Therefore, I
            will push Capulet's men from the
            wall, and thrust his maids to the
            wall.

Benvolio, disgusted, gets out of the car.

                         BENVOLIO
            The quarrel is between our masters...

                         GREGORY
                   (yelling after him)
            ...and us their men.

EXT.  GAS STATION.  AFTERNOON.

FOLLOW: Benvolio as he heads for the bathroom.

PICK UP: A mother wrangling three little boys out of a
station wagon - the smallest kid carries a toy pistol.

SUPER FAST SCAN TRACK: Past the mother to - the huge black
sedan pulling up outside the gas station mini-mart.

The front door of the sedan opens.  Shiny black boots -
decorated with tiny, silver, cat-shaped spurs - plant
themselves on the ground.  The boots are joined by two other
pairs of well-shod feet.

HOLD: The spurred boots move out of frame.

CRANE UP: The other feet belong to a tough-looking Latin
youth ABRA - and his goateed side-kick PETRUCHIO.

Abra and Petruchio enter the mini-mart, as four white-clad
girls exit.

FOLLOW: The girls as they head for their car.

SUPER FAST SCAN TRACK: Past the girls to:

INT.  TRUCK.  AFTERNOON.

Sampson is trying to out boast Gregory.

                         SAMPSON
            I will show myself a tyrant.  When
            I have fought with the men I will
            be civil with the maids, I will cut
            off their heads.

Gregory; mock outrage.

                         GREGORY
            The heads of the maids?

Sampson leers lecherously at the girls.

                         SAMPSON
            Ay, the heads of the maids, or
            their maiden heads, take it in what
            sense thou wilt.

                         GREGORY
            They must take it in sense that
            feel it.

Gregory and Sampson pump up the song on the sound system and
sing out at the girls.

                         GREGORY/SAMPSON
                   (singing)
            I am a pretty piece of flesh!
            I am a pretty piece of flesh!
            Me, they shall feel while I am able
            to stand;
            I am a pretty piece of flesh!

The girls, pretending not to notice, get into the car.

EXT.  GAS STATION - MINIMART.  AFTERNOON.

GREGORY'S P.O.V.: The car pulls away revealing... Abra and
Petruchio exiting the mini-mart.

INT.  TRUCK.  AFTERNOON.

CLOSE ON: Gregory.

CLOSE ON: Sampson - Their singing abruptly halts.

                         SAMPSON
            Here comes of the House of Capulet.

EXT.  GAS STATION.  AFTERNOON.

Abra and Petruchio stare coldly toward the boys.

INT.  TRUCK.  AFTERNOON.

CLOSE ON: Sampson swallowing hard.

CLOSE ON: Gregory; eyes locked to the Capulets. With fake
bravado he nudges Sampson.

                         GREGORY
            Quarrel I will back thee.

CLOSE ON: Sampson trying to quell his rising panic.

                         SAMPSON
            Let us take the law of our sides.
            Let them begin.

SUDDENLY: BANG! Gregory and Sampson jump.

WHIP PAN: It was the garage attendant slamming the hood.

Gregory and Sampson are mortally embarrassed.

EXT.  MINI-MART.  AFTERNOON.

Abra and Petruchio laugh contemptuously and move to their
car:

FOLLOW: The mother and kids exiting the mini-mart.

SUPER FAST SCAN TRACK: To...

INT.  TRUCK.  AFTERNOON.

Sampson furiously tries to save face.

                         SAMPSON
            I will bite my thumb at them; which
            is a disgrace to them if they bear
            it.

Sampson quickly bites his thumb toward Abra's back as he
gets into the sedan.

INT.  SEDAN.  AFTERNOON.

Abra's eyes flick to the rear view mirror.

E.C.U.: The rear view mirror; Sampson biting his thumb.

EXT.  GAS STATION.  AFTERNOON.

Suddenly, a blood curdling screech of tires - the sedan,
rubber burning, reverses full speed toward Sampson and
Gregory.

The mother in the station wagon brakes to avoid collision -
a sports car shunts into her vehicle.  Mother and children
scream.

Attendants scatter.

The Capulet car shudders to a halt inches from the truck,
blocking its path.

INT.  BLACK SEDAN.  AFTERNOON.

CLOSE ON: A scurry of limbs scrabbling across seats and
reaching for door handles;

EXT.  GAS STATION.  AFTERNOON.

Abra hauls Sampson from the truck. Gregory leaps out,
Petruchio covers him. Abra slams Sampson against the side of
the vehicle - then, goading him to go for his gun, screams:

                         ABRA
            Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?

Sampson's shaking hand hovers - ready to draw.

                         SAMPSON
            I do bite my thumb, sir.

INT.  STATION WAGON.  AFTERNOON.

CUT TO: The panicked mother in the station wagon.  She
motions her children to the floor.

EXT.  GAS STATION.  AFTERNOON.

Customers run for cover.

CLOSE ON: Abra: An hysterical rage; he shrieks:

                         ABRA
            Do you bite you thumb at us, sir?

                         SAMPSON
                   (sweating, murmurs to Gregory)
            Is the law on our side if I say "Ay"?

                         GREGORY
            No.

INT.  BATHROOM.  AFTERNOON.

CLOSE ON: The black cowboy boots, trousers down around them.
The sound of a toilet flushing.

PAN TO: The next cubicle, the door opens revealing Benvolio.

EXT.  GAS STATION.  AFTERNOON.

CLOSE ON: Sampson, still sweating.

                         SAMPSON
            No, sir, I do not bite my thumb at
            you, sir - but I do bite my thumb,
            sir!

CUT TO: Gregory; a ridiculous inquiry.

                         GREGORY
            Do you quarrel, sir?

CUT TO: Abra; a dangerous smile.

                         ABRA
            Quarrel sir, no sir.

CLOSE ON: Sampson; unconvincing bravado...

                         SAMPSON
            But if you do, sir, I am for you. I
            serve as good a man as you.

CLOSE ON: Abra; a lethal question.

                         ABRA
            No better?

CLOSE ON: Sampson, trapped.

                         SAMPSON
            Well sir...

INT.  STATION WAGON.  AFTERNOON.

CUT TO: Inside the station wagon.  The mother does not
notice her five year old aiming a toy gun toward the boys.

EXT.  GAS STATION.  AFTERNOON.

CUT TO: Gregory's P.O.V.: Benvolio emerging from the
bathroom - he whispers maniacally.

                         GREGORY
            Here comes our kinsman. Say better!

EXTREME CLOSE UP: Sampson; he screams:

                         SAMPSON
            YES SIR, BETTER!

EXTREME CLOSE UP: Abra demonically roars:

                         ABRA
            THOU LIEST!

CUT TO: Benvolio. Terror stricken, he sees the boys.

DISTORTED OUT OF CONTROL CLOSE UP: Abra shrieks:

                         ABRA
            DRAW IF YOU BE MEN!

LIGHTNING CUT: Four hands reaching for guns.

SLAM ZOOM: To Benvolio - weapon outstretched he screams:

                         BENVOLIO
            Part, fools! You know not what you
            do!

MUSIC STING; A SUPER MARCO SLAM ZOOM along the barrel of
Benvolio's gun; the engraved gun type reads:

'Sword 9mm series S'

CUT TO: Benvolio. He screams in desperation:

                         BENVOLIO
            Put up your swords!

Gregory, Sampson, Abra, and Petruchio freeze.  A moment -
then from behind, the unmistakable sound of a gun being
cocked.

EXTREME CLOSE UP: The black cowboy boots.

CRANE UP: To find the dark cold eyes and feline smile, of
the wearer of the boots. His name is TYBALT; a cigarette is
clenched between his teeth and his gun is aimed at Benvolio's
head.

                         TYBALT
            What, art thou drawn amoung these
            heartless hinds?
            Turn thee Benvolio.

Benvolio, a choked explanation:

                         BENVOLIO
            I do but keep the peace.

A mocking smile.

                         TYBALT
            Peace? I hate the word
            As I hate hell, all Montagues, and...

EXTREME CLOSE UP: Tybalt's finger squeezing the trigger...

Suddenly we hear firing from Tybalt's blind side.

Tybalt redirects his weapon, cracking off a single shot at
the surprise attacker.

EXT./INT.  MINIMART.  AFTERNOON.

It is the five year old from the station wagon. The bullet
smacks the toy gun from the child's hand, shattering the
wagon's window.

Mother and children scream.

EXT.  GAS STATION.  AFTERNOON.

A panicked Benvolio falls back, accidentally his gun fires -
the bullet whistles past Tybalt's head.

Tybalt combat rolls, and using a screaming car load of girls
as cover, returns two quick shots, narrowly missing Benvolio.

EXT.  GAS STATION.  AFTERNOON.

The gas station attendant hits a button and heavy metal
screens slam down.

EXT.  GAS STATION.  AFTERNOON.

CUT TO: Gregory firing - a bullet rips through Abra's arm.

Petruchio dives for cover; Gregory and Sampson leap into
Benvolio's truck.  Rubber burns as they smash past the
Capulet vehicle.

CLOSE ON: Tybalt taking aim.

EXT.  HIGHWAY - SUPERMARKET.  AFTERNOON.

His first shot plugs the fuel tank, the second a tire.  Out
of control and spewing gasoline the Montague truck careens
across the highway and through the glass front of a
supermarket.

Gregory and Sampson throw themselves from the truck moments
before...

EXT.  SUPERMARKET.  AFTERNOON.

CLOSE ON: The gas tank erupts into an almighty fireball.

The screen fills with flame: the following images combust in
front of us:

EXT.  HIGHWAY - SUPERMARKET - FROM AIR.  AFTERNOON.

NEWS CHOPPER P.O.V.: Citizens run in the streets.

Looters raid shops near the supermarket - security guards
return fire.

INT.  RESTAURANT.  NIGHT.

A table of dark suited men and their wives.

CLOSE ON: The powerful 60 year old face of FULGENCIO CAPULET.
Seated next to him is his much younger wife GLORIA.

SUDDENLY: Windows explode in a tidal wave of glass.  Diners
take cover.

Capulet moves fearlessly toward the window.

                         CAPULET
                   (to a waiter)
            Give me my long sword!

EXT.  STREET.  NIGHT.

CLOSE ON: The word MONTAGUE fills the screen.

PULL BACK: We see the word is the number plate of a large
black limousine.

The limousine is stuck in the traffic snarl - bullets bounce
off its bullet proof windshield.

INT.  MONTAGUE'S LIMOUSINE.  NIGHT.

TED MONTAGUE, a 60 year old red-faced bulldog of a man,
bursts from the back of the limousine.

                         MONTAGUE
            What noise is this!

As Ted draws an enormous pearl handed revolver, CAROLINE,
his conservatively dressed wife, tries to restrain him.

                         CAROLINE
            Thou shalt not stir one foot to
            seek a foe!

                         MONTAGUE
                   (shrugging her off)
            Hold me not, let me go!

EXT.  STREET.  NIGHT.

Crouched behind a truck, Benvolio shakily tries to re-load.

CLOSE ON: The barrel of Tybalt's gun enters frame and
presses into Benvolio's forehead.  Tybalt whispers sweetly.

                         TYBALT
            Look upon thy death, Benvolio.

CLOSE ON: Tybalt's finger on the trigger.  Benvolio screams
a scream of mortal horror.

SUDDENLY Tybalt is blinded by a burning shaft of light.  A
magnificently powerful helicopter gunship hovers above him.
A command booms from the chopper's public address system.

                         CAPTAIN PRINCE
                   (over PA)
            Rebellious subjects, enemies to
            peace,
            Throw your mistempered weapons to
            the ground.

INT.  CHOPPER.  NIGHT.

CLOSE ON: The steely gray eyes of CAPTAIN PRINCE, chief of
the Verona Beach Police Department. He lifts the microphone
and repeats the command.

                         CAPTAIN PRINCE
            Throw your mistempered weapons to
            the ground!

EXT.  VERONA BEACH.  NIGHT.

Tybalt looks up to the chopper.  Patrol cars screech to a
halt.

An almighty orchestral chord.

EXT.  VERONA BEACH - MATTE SHOT.  NIGHT.

SUPER WIDE SHOT: A trail of devastation winds up through
grid-locked traffic to the burning supermarket.

In the distance looms an enormous statue of Christ flanked
by two glass towers.  We push toward the towers.  One is
neon-crowned MONTAGUE, the other, CAPULET.

We hear:

                         VOICE OVER
            Two households, both alike in
            dignity.
            In fair Verona, where we lay our
            scene
            From ancient grudge break to new
            mutiny,
            Where civil blood makes civil hands
            unclean.
            From forth the fatal loins of these
            two foes
            A pair of star crossed lovers take
            their life.
            Whose misadventured piteous
            overthrows
            Doth with their death bury their
            parents strife.

A dark chord.

EXT.  VERONA BEACH SKYLINE.  NIGHT.

A swarm of helicopters thunder into frame.  We see
compressed, time-lapsed, images of their journey.

SLAM INTO: A coat of arms that labels a large tower - the
emblem reads; "Verona Beach Police Department: In God We
Trust".

HOLD:

INT.  CAPTAIN PRINCE'S PRECINCT OFFICE.  NIGHT.

CLOSE ON: Captain Prince's grim features.  He eyes Capulet
and Montague.

                         CAPTAIN PRINCE
            Three civil brawls, bred of an airy 
            word
            By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,
            Have thrice disturbed the quiet of
            our streets.

Capulet's lawyer tries to intervene.

                         LAWYER
            My noble Prince I can...

Captain Prince overriding, slams the desk.

                         CAPTAIN PRINCE
            If ever you disturb our streets
            again,
            Your lives shall pay the forfeit of
            the peace.

Hold on Captain Prince's determined gaze.

EXT.  VERONA STREET.  DAWN.

A majestic sunrise; Ted Montague's limousine sulks through
deserted streets.  In the distance, Jesus looks out over the
now peaceful city.

INT.  MONTAGUE'S LIMOUSINE.  DAWN.

Ted Montague, his wife Caroline, and nephew Benvolio ride in
uncomfortable silence.

Caroline finally speaks her anger.

                         CAROLINE
            O where is Romeo?  Saw you him
            today?
                   (pointedly to Montague)
            Right glad I am he was not at this
            fray.

Montague snorts derisively and stares out the window.
Embarrassed, Benvolio tries to be of assistance.

                         BENVOLIO
            Madam, underneath The Grove of
            Sycamore
            So early walking did I see your son.

Ted Montague speaks with contempt.

                         MONTAGUE
            Many a morning hath he there been
            seen
            With tears augmenting the fresh
            morning's dew.

Caroline struggles to contain her emotion.

                         CAROLINE
            Away from light steals home my
            heavy son
            And private in his chamber pens
            himself,
            Shuts up his windows, locks fair
            daylight out
            And makes himself an artificial
            night.

Montague barks into the car intercom.

                         MONTAGUE
            Westward from this city side.

EXT.  STREET.  DAWN.

The limousine U-turns heading west.

EXT.  BEACH.  DAWN.

To the melancholic strains of Mozart's "Serenade for Winds",
we see a blond nineteen year old boy sitting alone on an
empty beach.

CLOSE ON: The boy, ROMEO.  Looking out over the ocean he
sucks on the last of a cigarette and then writes intensely
in a small worn note book.

We hear his voice over.

                         ROMEO (V/O)
            Love is a smoke made with the fume
            of sighs;
            Being purged, a fire sparkling in
            lovers' eyes;
            Being vexed, a sea nourished with
            lovers' tears.
            What is it else?  A madness most
            discreet,
            A choking gall and a preserving
            sweet.

INT.  MONTAGUE'S LIMOUSINE.  DAWN.

The limo is parked in a cross street that runs down to the
beach.

Opposite the limo, young diehard clubbers, faded drag queens
and street people, hang outside a dilapidated nightclub.  A
broken neon sign reads: "The Grove of Sick Amore."

Ted, Caroline and Benvolio sit watching the silhouette of
Romeo on the beach.

                         MONTAGUE
            Black and portentous must this
            humour prove
            Unless good counsel may the cause
            remove.

EXT.  BEACH.  DAWN.

P.O.V.: From the limousine.  Romeo rises and listlessly
makes his way up the beach - seeing his father's car he
turns and heads for the path that hugs the beach front.

INT.  MONTAGUE'S LIMOUSINE.  DAWN.

                         BENVOLIO
            So please you step aside.
            I'll know his grievance or be much
            denied.

Benvolio clambers out of the limo.

CLOSE ON: Montague, an encouraging smile.

                         MONTAGUE
            Come Madam.  Let's away.

EXT.  STREET.  DAWN.

The limousine pulls away and Benvolio heads after Romeo.  He
pauses.  A deck at the rear of "Sick Amore" sprawls onto the
beach.  At the base of the deck, Benvolio can see Romeo
squatting in discussion with an old drunk.  Benvolio
approaches with a not very convincing casualness.

                         BENVOLIO
            Good morrow, cousin.

Romeo turns.  Sore, red, unfriendly eyes squint back at
Benvolio.

                         ROMEO
            Is the day so young?

                         BENVOLIO
            But new struck, Coz.

Romeo rises, Benvolio follows.

                         ROMEO
            Ay me!  Sad hours seem long.

Romeo stops as if taking in Benvolio for the first time.

                         ROMEO (CONT.)
            Was that my father that went hence
            so fast?

                         BENVOLIO
                   (guilty)
            It was.

Benvolio chases Romeo down the path which divides the beach
from a string of cheap souvenir shops and sleazy bars.

                         BENVOLIO
            What sadness lengthens Romeo's hours?

                         ROMEO
            Not having that which having makes
            them short.

                         BENVOLIO
            In love?

                         ROMEO
            Out.

                         BENVOLIO
            Of love?

                         ROMEO
            Out of her favor where I am in love.

                         BENVOLIO
            Alas that love, so gentle in his
            view,
            Should be so tyrannical and rough
            in proof!

                         ROMEO
            Alas that love, whose view...

Romeo is halted by the sight of last night's disturbance
displayed on a small TV screen in an outdoor bar.

                         ROMEO (CONT.)
            What fray was here?

Benvolio starts to reply.

                         ROMEO (CONT.)
                   (angrily)
            Yet tell me not, for I have heard
            it all.
            Here's much to do with hate, but
            more with love.

Romeo turns the corner away from the beach.  He strides
along the sidewalk raging.

                         ROMEO (CONT.)
            Why then, O brawling love, O loving
            hate,
            O anything, of nothing first
            create!
            O heavy lightness, serious vanity,
            Misshapen chaos of well-seeming
            forms,
            Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold
            fire, sick health,
            Still-waking sleep, that is not
            what it is!

Romeo screams at a huge bouncer who lounges in the doorway
of a sex club.

                         ROMEO (CONT.)
            This love feel I, that feel no love
            in this!

The bouncer's hand moves to his gun.  Romeo, ignoring him,
turns on Benvolio.  A mocking laughter through tears:

                         ROMEO (CONT.)
            Dost thou not laugh?

Benvolio, nervously eyeing the bouncer, shepherds Romeo out
of danger.

                         BENVOLIO
            No, coz, I rather weep.

Romeo smiles.

                         ROMEO
            Farewell, my coz.

Romeo, breaking into a jog, leaves Benvolio behind.  Benvolio
pursues him down the street.

EXT.  ROMEO'S CAR.  DAY.

CLOSE ON: The sleeping face of a fourteen year old boy -
BALTHASAR.

PULL BACK: Balthasar sleeps on the hood of a magnificent
silver car.

Three or four kids doze on the sidewalk.  As Romeo
approaches, they jump up and begin vigorously polishing the
already gleaming car.

Balthasar wakes.  He springs off the hood, chases the kids
away, then, producing a huge bunch of keys, opens the car
door for Romeo.

Benvolio intercepts Romeo at the car.

                         BENVOLIO
            Tell me in sadness, who is it that
            you love.

                         ROMEO
            In sadness, cousin, I do love...a
            woman.

                         BENVOLIO
            I aimed so near when I supposed you
            loved.

Romeo leans against the car.

                         ROMEO
            A right good marksman; and she's
            fair I love.

Romeo pulls his shirt down to reveal a small shoulder tattoo.

CLOSE ON:  The tattooed word; ROSALINE.

                         BENVOLIO
            Rosaline!
                   (he is impressed)
            A right fair mark, fair coz, is
            soonest hit.

                         ROMEO
            She'll not be hit with Cupid's
            arrow.
            She hath Dian's wit,
            And in strong proof of chastity
            lives well armed.

Benvolio can't believe it.

                         BENVOLIO
            Then she hath sworn that she will
            still live chaste?

                         ROMEO
            She hath; and in that sparing makes
            huge waste.

Benvolio - a plan.
                         BENVOLIO
            Be ruled by me; forget to think of
            her.

                         ROMEO
            O, teach me how I should forget to
            think!

Benvolio indicates one of the working girls already strutting
the foot path.

                         BENVOLIO
            By giving liberty unto thine eyes.
            Examine other beauties.

Romeo laughs dismissively.  He throws the kids a few coins
and slides into the drivers seat.  Balthasar jumps in back.

                         ROMEO
            Farewell.  Thou canst not teach me
            to forget.

                         BENVOLIO
            I'll pay that doctrine, or else die
            in debt.

Benvolio leaps into the passenger seat of the moving vehicle.

INT.  CAPULET OFFICE.  DAY.

An orchestral fanfare.  TRACK DOWN: Past monstrous letters
that read CAPULET and in through a window to discover
Fulgencio Capulet.  He stares out the window toward the
other tallest building in Verona; the one crested with the
word MONTAGUE.

                         CAPULET
            But Montague is bound as well as I,
            In penalty alike;

Capulet turns: on the other side of his desk sits DAVID
PARIS; a square-jawed young man in a red cashmere sweater.
Tea has been served from an exquisite silver tea service.

                         CAPULET (CONT.)
            And 'tis not hard, I think, for me
            so old as we to keep the peace.

Dave smiles obligingly.

                         DAVE
            Of honorable reckoning are you
            both,
            And pity 'tis you lived at odds so
            long.

An awkward pause: Dave sips tea, then, with a deep breath...

                         DAVE (CONT.)
            But now, my lord, what say you to
            my suit?

Capulet considers the framed photograph on his desk.

                         CAPULET
            But saying o'er what I have said
            before;
            My child is yet a stranger in the
            world;
            Let two more summers wither in
            their pride,
            Ere we may think her ripe to be a
            bride.

Dave is politely insistent.

                         DAVE
            Younger than she are happy mothers
            made.

                         CAPULET
                   (checking him hard)
            And too soon marred are those so
            early made.
            Earth hath swallowed all my hopes
            but she;
            She is the hopeful lady of my earth.

Capulet rounds the desk and places a fatherly hand on Dave's
shoulder.

                         CAPULET (CONT.)
            But woo her, gentle Paris, get her
            heart.
            My will to her consent is but a
            part,
            And she agreed, within her scope of
            choice
            Lies my consent and fair according
            voice.
            This night I hold an old Accustomed
            feast.

Capulet leans close.

                         CAPULET (CONT.)
            At my poor house, look to behold
            this night,
            Fresh female buds that make dark
            heaven light.
            Hear all; all see,
            And like her most whose merit most
            shall be.

Capulet smiles knowingly.  Dave seems encouraged.

                         CAPULET (CONT.)
                   (a hearty slap)
            Come go with me!

Capulet excitedly ushers Dave from the office.

INT.  POOL HALL.  DAY.

Dim, smoke filled.  Benvolio and Romeo play pool.

                         BENVOLIO
                   (chalking his cue)
            Take thou some new infection to thy
            eye.

He lines up the six ball top pocket.

                         BENVOLIO (CONT.)
            And the rank poison of the old will
            die.

A hopeless shot that slams the eight ball toward the side
pocket.  Romeo stops it with his hand and hurls it against
the other balls.

                         BENVOLIO
            Why, Romeo, art thou mad?

Romeo sinks the other balls with his hands.

                         ROMEO
            Not mad, but bound more than a
            madman is;
            Shut up in prison, kept without my
            food,

Romeo stalks away from the table.

                         ROMEO (CONT.)
            Whipped and tormented.

He stops at the gun check, rummaging in his pocket.

                         ROMEO
            Good day, good fellow.

A crusty old man looks up from the small television.  His
entire face a tattooed shooting target, the bullseye between
his eyes.

The old man points to the sign that reads: "No ticket no
gun."  Romeo finally produces a ticket.  Crusty the Target
goes out back.  Romeo's attention is caught by the television.

INT.  T.V.  STUDIO SET.  DAY

CUT TO: TELEVISION.

An ostentatious woman and her over groomed partner Rich,
hosts what looks to be a kind of Entertainment Tonight show.
The graphic behind them reads "Solemnity Nights" with Susan
Santandiago and Rich Ranchidis.

Susan speaks conspiratorially to camera.

                         SUSAN
            Now I'll tell you without asking.
            The great
            Rich Capulet, holds an old
            accustomed feast;

Rich chimes in:

                         RICH
            A fair Assembly.

                         SUSAN
            I Pray you sir can you read?

A list of names begins to scroll across the screen.  Rich
reads them off.

                         RICH
            Signor Placentio and his wife and
            daughters,
            Signor Martino, the Lady Widow
            Of Utruvio and her lovely nieces,
            Rosaline and Livia...

INT.  POOL HALL.  DAY.

CUT TO: Benvolio, he leans into Romeo.

                         BENVOLIO
            At this same ancient feast of
            Capulet's
            Sups the fair Rosaline; whom thou
            so loves,
            With all the admired beauties of
            Verona.
            Go thither, and with unattained eye
            Compare her face with some that I
            shall show,
            And I will make thee think thy swan
            a crow.

                         ROMEO
            One fairer than my love?

Crusty returns.  He hands the boys their guns.

                         ROMEO (CONT.)
            The all-seeing sun Ne'er saw her
            match since first the world begun.

CUT TO: TELEVISION.

                         SUSAN
            If you be not of the house of
            Montagues,
            Come and crush a cup of wine!

                         RICH
            Rest you merry!

CUT TO: Romeo, he considers.

                         ROMEO
            I'll go along, no such sight to be
            shown.
            But to rejoice in splendour of mine
            own.

The boys move off.

PUSH IN ON: THE TELEVISION.

EXT.  CAPULET STATE.  DAY.

An aerial shot of a magnificent island estate.  An Italianate
wonder of Florentine architecture.  Armed guards patrol the
grounds.  The telecaption reads "Capulet Mansion."

The file tape loses its television quality.  We sweep down
through manicured gardens, where workers prepare decorations
for tonight's celebrations, and into the house.  The music
darkens and we hear the desperate calling of a girl's name.

                         VOICE OVER
            J U L I E T !

INT.  CAPULET MANSION - CORRIDOR.  DAY.

CUT TO: A long deserted corridor.

                         VOICE OVER
            J U L I E T !

INT.  CAPULET MANSION - DRAWING ROOM.  DAY.

CUT TO: An echoey Chinoiserie style drawing room.

                         VOICE OVER
            J U L I E T !

INT.  BATHROOM.  DAY.

CLOSE ON: The still, serene, submerged features of a
beautiful young girl.  Dark floating hair gently frames the
face.  Heavy liquid eyes stare up through the water.

We hear, though faintly, the calling:

                         VOICE OVER
            J U L I E T !

With a rush JULIET surfaces.  As she gulps air, we realise
that she is in fact, in a bath.

We hear the calling loudly again.

                         VOICE OVER
            J U L I E T !

Juliet listens.  For a moment she is very still, then she
closes her eyes and slides back beneath the surface of the
water.

INT.  ENTRANCE HALL CAPULET MANSION.  DAY.

A Gothic, unfriendly environment heavy with religious
iconography.  The entrance hall is crowded with workers and
servants preparing for tonight's party.

Gloria Capulet fiddles with a short black wig in the hallway
mirror.  She is attired in full Cleopatra costume.

Dissatisfied with the wig, she rips it from her head and
calls maniacally.

                         GLORIA
            J U L I E T !

Gloria is met by the NURSE, a fat, grandmotherly Hispanic
woman.

                         GLORIA (CONT.)
            Nurse, where's my daughter?  Call
            her forth to me.

                         NURSE
            I bade her come.  God forbid!
            Where's this girl?
            Juliet!

CUT TO: The top of the stairs.  As if from nowhere, Juliet
has appeared.  She wears a bathrobe and her hair is wet.

                         JULIET
                   (coolly)
            Madam, I am here.  What is you will.

Gloria, startled, sweeps up the stairs and shuffles her
daughter toward a doorway.

                         GLORIA
            Nurse, give leave awhile, we must
            talk in secret.

INT.  GLORIA'S DRESSING ROOM.  DAY.

Gloria shepherds Juliet into her opulent dressing room and
closes the door.  She circles with nervous vexation searching
for words, stops, then suddenly opens the door and yells out
to the Nurse.

                         GLORIA (CONT.)
            Nurse, come back again.
            I have remembered me, thou's hear
            our counsel.

The Nurse enters.  Gloria, still refusing eye contact,
checks her appearance once more in the mirror.  She takes a
hairbrush and, feigning pleasantness, intensely brushes her
hair.

                         GLORIA (CONT.)
            Nurse, thou knowest my daughter's
            of a pretty age.

                         NURSE
                   (to Juliet)
            Thou wast the prettiest babe that
            e'er I nursed.

The hair brush clatters onto the dresser.  A moment of tense
silence.  Gloria grips herself and pours a sherry.

Back still turned, she speaks to her daughter.

                         GLORIA
            By my count, I was your mother much
            upon these years
            That you are now a maid.

A nembutal twists like a pin in the corner of Gloria's mouth.
She slugs it down with the sherry and turns abruptly to face
Juliet.

                         GLORIA (CONT.)
            Thus then in brief, the valiant
            Paris seeks you for his love.

CUT TO: Juliet; an uncomprehending stare.

The Nurse, caught off guard, tries to buoy the situation.

                         NURSE
            A man, young lady!  Lady, such a
            man
            As all the world - why, he's a man
            of wax.

The medication takes immediate effect upon Gloria.  She
joins Juliet on the couch and coos in Paris's favour.

                         GLORIA
            Verona's summer hath not such a
            flower.

                         NURSE
            Nay, he's a flower; in faith, a
            very flower.

                         GLORIA
            This night you shall behold him at
            our feast;
            Read o'er the volume of young
            Paris' face
            And find delight writ there with
            beauty's pen.
            This precious book of love, this
            unbound lover,
            To beautify him only lacks a cover.
            So shall you share all that he doth
            possess,
            By having him, making yourself no
            less.

Gloria probes Juliet's thoughts.

                         GLORIA
            Can you like of Paris' love?

Juliet, adept at negotiating her mother's strange moods,
chooses her words precisely.

                         JULIET
            I'll look to like, if looking
            liking move,
            But no more deep will I endart mine
            eye,
            Than your consent gives strength to
            make it fly.

PETER the chauffeur enters.

                         PETER
            Madam.  The guests are come.

                         GLORIA
                   (checks the mirror)
            We follow thee.

She exits, Nurse in tow.

CLOSE ON: Juliet stares out the windows and across the water.

Suddenly the Nurse's face leers into shot.  She whispers
enthusiastically into Juliet's ear.

                         NURSE
            Go girl, seek happy nights to happy
            days.

CLOSE ON: Juliet's face.

EXT.  CAPULET MANSION.  DAY/NIGHT.

JUMP CUT: Aerial shot of Capulet Mansion.  We time lapse
from late afternoon to night; fairy lights illuminate,
guests appear, music swells, and a single incandescent
flare, explodes pink against the inky sky.

EXT.  BEACH.  NIGHT.

CLOSE ON: Romeo: his face glows pink.  He is sitting on the
grubby shoreline of Verona Bay dressed as a boy King Arthur,
with fake chain mail and sword.

Romeo watches the dying flare sink into the bay.  The sound
of the party drifts across the water.  Balthasar, dressed as
Frankenstein's monster, touches a lighter to a large bong
and Romeo inhales smoke.

Behind them, Benvolio, drunk and dressed as a pizza, is
yelling at Gregory, who, dressed as a Viking, is trying to
cut slices off his pizza costume.  Sampson, also dressed as
a Viking, sits in the back of a car.  One arm is bandaged
and he swigs from a bottle.

Suddenly the darkness is slashed by headlights.  A reckless
sports car speeds toward the boys.  Stereo screaming, the
car skids to a halt.

CLOSE ON: Music blares from the sound system.  A silver
stilettoed foot emerges from the car and plants itself
firmly in the dirt.

CUT TO: The boys, eyes wide with amazement.

CUT TO: Another stiletto follows the first.  Guitar groans.

PAN: Slowly up a shapely pair of black stockinged legs, past
a hint of garter belt to a black sequined mini-skirt and up
over a muscular dark skinned stomach and tiny sequined bra
top, to discover: the 21 year old male, African American
face of MERCUTIO.

CUT TO: The boys.  Recovering from the initial shock, they
laugh and cat-call raucously.

CUT TO: Mercutio.  He roughly jams a short black wig onto
his head and yells above the music.

                         MERCUTIO
            Strike drum!

Mercutio magically produces invitations from somewhere
within his mini-skirt and dances down the beach to the boys.

Aggressively bumping and grinding, Mercutio distributes the
invitations.  Reaching Romeo, he declares:

                         MERCUTIO
            We'll on without apology.

Romeo lets the invitation fall to the sand.

                         ROMEO
            I am not for this ambling.
            Being but heavy, I will bear the
            light.

Romeo pulls on the bong once more.

Suddenly, Mercutio is upon Romeo.  Hauling him to his feet,
he waltzes him through the sand.

                         MERCUTIO
            Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you
            dance.

Romeo pushes Mercutio away.

                         ROMEO
            Not I, believe me.  You have
            dancing shoes
            With nimble soles.  I have a soul
            of lead.

Mercutio in mock sympathy.

                         MERCUTIO
            Too great oppression for a tender
            thing.

                         ROMEO
            Is love a tender thing?  It is too
            rough, too rude, too boisterous,
            and it pricks like thorn.

Romeo lies staring up at the stars.

                         MERCUTIO
            If love be rough with you, be rough
            with love.

Mercutio jumps on Romeo.

                         MERCUTIO (CONT.)
            Prick love for pricking, and you
            beat love down.

Romeo fights Mercutio off.

                         ROMEO
            Under love's heavy burden do I sink!

CUT TO: Benvolio, impatiently honking the horn.

                         BENVOLIO
            Every man betake him to his legs!

Mercutio heads Romeo toward the car.

                         MERCUTIO
            Come, we burn daylight, ho!

Romeo pulls away.

                         ROMEO
            But 'tis no wit to go.

Mercutio turns, exasperated.

                         MERCUTIO
            Why, may one ask?

                         ROMEO
            I dreamt a dream tonight.

                         MERCUTIO
            And so did I.

                         ROMEO
            Well, what was yours?

                         MERCUTIO
            That dreamers often lie.

                         ROMEO
            In bed asleep, while they do dream
            things true.

Mercutio produces a tiny gold pill case.

                         MERCUTIO
            O, then I see Queen Mab hath been
            with you.
            She is the fairies' midwife, and
            she comes
            In shape no bigger than an agate
            stone
            On the forefinger of an alderman,
            Drawn with a team of little atomies
            Over men's noses as they lie asleep.

Tantalisingly, he passes the case beneath Romeo's nose.

                         MERCUTIO (CONT.)
            Her chariot is an empty hazelnut,
            Her wagoner a small gray-coated gnat.

With a conjurer's dexterity Mercutio extracts a small, gray
pill.

                         MERCUTIO (CONT.)
            And in this state she gallops night
            by night
            Through lovers' brains, and then
            they dream of love;

He palms the pills.  It reappears from behind Romeo's ear.

                         MERCUTIO (CONT.)
            O'er lawyers' fingers who straight
            dream on fees;
            O'er ladies' lips, who straight on
            kisses dream,
            Which oft the angry Mab with
            blisters plagues.
            Because their breaths with
            sweetmeats tainted are.

The pill box glints in the moonlight.

                         MERCUTIO (CONT.)
            Sometime she driveth o'er a
            soldier's neck;
            And then dreams he of cutting
            foreign throats.
            And being thus frighted, swears a
            prayer or two
            And sleeps again.

Mercutio now intensely angry:

                         MERCUTIO (CONT.)
            This is that very Mab
            That plaits the manes of horses in
            the night
            And bakes the elf-locks in foul
            sluttish hairs

He screams into the night.

                         MERCUTIO (CONT.)
            This is the hag, when maids lie on
            their backs,
            That presses them and learns them
            first to bear,
            Making them women of good carriage.
            This is she, this is she...

CLOSE ON: Mercutio.  He breaks off.  There is a strange
stillness amongst the group.  Romeo goes to his friend.

                         ROMEO
            Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace.
            Thou talkest of nothing.

Mercutio meets Romeo's gaze.

                         MERCUTIO
            True, I talk of dreams;
            Which are the children of an idle
            brain,
            Begot of nothing but vain fantasy.
            Which is as thin of substance as
            the air
            And more inconstant than the wind,
            who woos
            Even now the frozen bosom of the
            north
            And, being angered, puffs away from
            thence
            Turning his attention to the dew-
            dropping south.

CUT TO: Benvolio in the car.  The alcohol has caught up with
him and he looks a little queasy.

                         BENVOLIO
            This wind you talk of blows us from
            ourselves:
            Supper is done and we shall come
            too late.

Romeo looks toward the distant city.

                         ROMEO
            I fear, too early, for my mind
            misgives
            Some consequence yet hanging in the
            stars
            Shall bitterly begin his fearful
            date
            With this night's revels, and
            expire the term
            Of a despised life closed in my
            breast,
            By some vile forfeit of untimely
            death.

PAUSE: The water turns golden as fireworks explode across
the bay.  Romeo smiles.

                         ROMEO (CONT.)
            But he that hath the steerage of my
            course
            Direct my sail!

He takes the pill and drops it into his mouth.

                         ROMEO (CONT.)
            On, lusty gentlemen!

With the rush of a mind altering cocktail, we ZOOM IN on
Romeo's eyes; they shimmer with the shooting star reflection
of exploding fireworks - a bending Eastern chord, we launch
into Donna Summer's 'I Feel Love', sung by the vocalist from
Soundgarden with orchestration by 'Deconstruction' and sitar
by Ravi Shankar.

EXT.  MERCUTIO'S CAR - ON FREEWAY.  NIGHT.

PULL OUT: From Romeo's eyes.  He is lying in the passenger
seat of Mercutio's convertible as it rockets along the
freeway.  The camera is directly above Romeo.  He stares up
at the fireworks that reflect in the windshield.  The car
and freeway begin to rotate and the camera follows.  We feel
that the car is now travelling upside-down.  The camera
sways through a brilliant explosion of fireworks that fill
the screen with a zillion pixilating, colored dots of fire.

INT.  CAPULET'S MANSION - BALLROOM.  NIGHT.

PULL OUT: To discover the glittering dots of fire refracting
from the sparkling domed roof of the magnificently ornate
Capulet Ballroom.  The camera swoops down over bizarrely
costumed revellers cavorting to a driving Latin big band.
The camera partners with a drugged Mercutio and Benvolio who
shamelessly caper with each other in a mock antic adagio.

CUT TO: Romeo gazing blankly at the dance floor.

CUT TO: Mercutio.  He sweeps up a thirty-something
sophisticate and twirls her in Romeo's direction.

                         MERCUTIO
            Everyman betake him to his legs!

Romeo moves off through the crowd.

CUT TO: ROMEO'S P.O.V.: Contorted images of costumed guests
eat, drink and laugh in a grotesque collision of Yves Saint
Laurent cocktail party and Bacchanalian romp.

Suddenly a large arm coils around Romeo's neck.

DISTORTED EXTREME CLOSE UP: A seriously intoxicated Fulgencio
Capulet; his puffy red face squeezes against Romeo's.

                         CAPULET
            Ah, I have seen the day that I
            could
            Tell a whispering tale in a fair
            ladies ear.
            Such as would please.

Capulet screams above the music:

                         CAPULET (CONT.)
            Come musicians play!

Blood drums in Romeo's ears.  Breaking free from Capulet's
grasp as he pushes through the crowd toward the bathroom.

INT.  BATHROOM.  NIGHT.

Silent, underwater shot.  Romeo's tranquil features submerged
in a basin of water.

BEAT.

With a gasp, Romeo rises.  A moment.  His breathing calms.
Then, smoothing water into his hair, he gazes into the
bathroom mirror.  He turns:

The entire wall opposite the mirror, is a magnificent salt-
water fish tank.

Romeo, drawn by it's submarine beauty, leans against the
fish tank.  Applause echoes faintly through the bathroom
speakers.

INT.  BALLROOM.  NIGHT.

As the applause dies, a dark-haired Latina Diva takes the
spotlight.  The band ease into the opening bars of a love
ballad.

INT.  BATHROOM.  NIGHT.

As the music swells, Romeo watches a moustached catfish
glide past a medieval castle.

Suddenly, Romeo pulls away.  Peering back at him through the
castle is a pair of exquisitely beautiful angelic eyes.

The Diva's first pure, achingly beautiful notes soar.

Confused, Romeo looks again.  There is no mistake - it is a
girl.  Through a shimmering curtain of ribbon weed, two dark
wide eyes, a childish nose and sumptuous full lips.

Romeo pushes his face closer to the glass.  The other face
snaps abruptly away.

INT.  POWDER ROOM.  NIGHT.

CUT TO: Juliet, dressed as an angel, on the other side of
the tank.  We now realise that the girls' powder room and
the boys' bathroom are divided by this watery wonder world.

Juliet warily moves closer to the glass.

INT.  BATHROOM.  NIGHT.

Romeo leans his face against the glass.  The love ballad
builds.

SLOW TRACK: From Romeo's profile, in through the water, and...

INT.  POWDER ROOM.  NIGHT.

...out the other side, to find Juliet in profile, peering
into the tank.

INT.  BATHROOM.  NIGHT.

Romeo presses his nose lightly against the glass.

INT.  POWDER ROOM.  NIGHT.

Juliet; a tiny smile.

Suddenly, CRASH!  The door slams open.  Juliet turns,
startled.  It is the Nurse.

                         NURSE
            Juliet, your mother calls.

The Nurse bustles Juliet out the door.  Juliet looks over
her shoulder at the mystery boy.

INT.  BALLROOM.  NIGHT.

Romeo, now without his mask, slams out of the bathroom -
Juliet and the Nurse have disappeared into the crowd.

CUT TO: Juliet being dragged along by the Nurse.  She
glances back toward the mystery boy, but he is gone.

Juliet and the Nurse rejoin Dave Paris, who is dressed as an
astronaut, and Gloria, at the side of the dance floor.

Dave, irresistible smile, extends his hand to Juliet.

                         DAVE
            Will you now deny to dance?

Juliet looks to Dave, desperately searching for a reason to
decline.  Gloria, brushing aside her silly daughter's
protests, slugs the last of her champagne and corrals them
onto the dance floor.

                         GLORIA
                   (whispering to Juliet)
            A man, young lady, such a man.

As Juliet is dragged onto the floor her eyes furtively
search for the boy.

CUT TO: Romeo in the crowd.  Desperate to find the girl, he
roughly shunts aside a reveller dressed as Lucifer, Prince
of Darkness.

HOLD ON: Lucifer.  He removes his mask: it is Tybalt.  He
turns to Abra, who's dressed as a demon.

                         TYBALT
            What, dares the slave come hither
            to fleer and scorn at our solemnity?
            Now by the stock and honor of my
            kin
            To strike him dead I hold it not a
            sin.

Tybalt moves off aggressively, but is halted as Capulet
slams a hand into his chest.

                         CAPULET
            Why how now kinsman, wherefore
            storm you so?

                         TYBALT
            Uncle, this is that villain Romeo.
            A Montague, our foe.

Capulet peers across the ballroom.

                         CAPULET
            Young Romeo is it?

                         TYBALT
            'Tis he.

                         CAPULET
            Content thee gentle coz, let him
            alone.
            I would not for the wealth of all
            this town
            Here in my house do him
            disparagement.
            Therefore be patient; take no note
            of him.

Tybalt can't believe it.

                         TYBALT
            I'll not endure him.

CLOSE ON: Capulet, exploding with rage.
                         CAPULET
            He shall be endured!
                   (slapping Tybalt viciously)
            What, goodman boy!  I say he shall!
            Go to.

Capulet violently shoves Tybalt to the ground.

                         CAPULET
            You'll make a mutiny among my guests!

A middle aged couple look on shocked - Capulet waves to them
festively:

                         CAPULET
            What?  Cheerly my hearts!

Capulet snorts at Tybalt in disgust.

                         CAPULET
            You'll not endure him!  Am I the
            master here or you?  Go to.

Smoothing his hair into place, Capulet turns back into the
ballroom.

CLOSE ON: Tybalt choking back tears of rage.

CUT TO: Romeo moving through the crowd.  For a moment the
crush clears and he spies the Angel on the dance floor.

CLOSE ON: Romeo whispers:

                         ROMEO
            Did my heart love till now?
            Forswear it, sight.
            For I ne'er saw true beauty till
            this night.

Romeo begins to circumnavigate the dance floor in an attempt
to get closer to Juliet.

CUT TO: Dave slow dancing with Juliet.

Juliet's eyes search the room for the boy.

CLOSE ON: Romeo.

CLOSE ON: Juliet.

Their eyes connect.

Juliet looks quickly back to Dave who, oblivious, returns
his most devastating smile.

CUT TO: The songstress, her voice soars.

CUT TO: Juliet.  Unable to look away from the boy, she
stares over Dave's shoulder.

CUT TO: Romeo.  Ignoring the danger, he continues to move
toward the Angel.

With the Diva's spiralling final notes, the ballad concludes.

A complete black out.  As the crowd break into wild applause,
Juliet's eyes search the darkness, but the boy is gone.

The crowd cheers and screams its applause.  An avalanche of
balloons, tinsel and confetti rains down from the roof;
swathes of red silk drop from the ceiling and the space is
transformed.

CLOSE ON: Juliet, searching for the boy.

Suddenly: A gasp, Juliet's eyes widen, shocked.

In the dark, a hand has shot out from the drape curtaining
off the stage and clasped hers.  Juliet barely dares breathe.

She glances furtively to Dave Paris - he watches the stage.

Slowly Juliet turns toward the hand; there through a break
in the curtain she can see eye, cheek and lips of the
mystery boy.  As the Diva reprises the chorus, Romeo gently
pulls Juliet behind the curtain.

INT.  BEHIND CURTAIN.  NIGHT.

Concealed from the party by the red velvet drape, hands
still clasped, the teenagers are so close their bodies
almost touch.

                         ROMEO
            If I profane with my unworthiest
            hand
            This holy shrine, the gentle sin is
            this.
            My lips, two blushing pilgrims,
            ready stand
            To smooth that rough touch with a
            tender kiss.

Romeo moves his lips toward Juliet's.  She stops him.

                         JULIET
            Good pilgrim, you do wrong your
            hand too much,
            Which mannerly devotion shows in
            this.
            For saints have hands that pilgrim's
            hands do touch,
            And palm to palm is holy palmers'
            kiss.

                         ROMEO
            Have not saints lips, and holy
            palmers too?

                         JULIET
                   (a gentle scolding)
            Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must
            use in prayer.

                         ROMEO
            O, then, dear saint, let lips do
            what hands do,
            They pray: grant thou, lest faith
            turn to despair.

                         JULIET
            Saints do not move, though grant
            for prayer's sake.

                         ROMEO
            Then move not while my prayer's
            effect I take.

He kisses her.

                         ROMEO (CONT.)
            Thus from my lips, by thine my sin
            is purged.

                         JULIET
            Then have my lips the sin that they
            have took.

                         ROMEO
            Sin from my lips?  O trespass
            sweetly urged!
            Give me my sin again.

He kisses her.

                         JULIET
            You kiss by th' book.

They kiss again.

Suddenly a harsh light falls across the entwined couple.
They break apart - Nurse has pulled open the curtain and
stands eyeing them severely.

                         NURSE
            Madam, your mother craves a word
            with you.

We see that the party is breaking up.  But for groups of
die-hard revellers, the room is nearly empty.

                         NURSE (CONT.)
            Come, let's away.

She takes firm control of her charge.

Juliet furtively motions for the startled Romeo not to
follow as he trails them across the room.

CUT TO: ROMEO'S P.O.V.: The Nurse and Juliet reach the door,
but instead of leaving, they turn and ascend the staircase
that arcs around to the mezzanine level.  They join a vexed
Gloria Capulet who clings to a patient Dave Paris.

Inaudible words are exchanged.  Juliet flickers her eyes
nervously to Romeo.

CUT TO: Romeo.  He halts at the foot of the stairs unsure.

CUT TO: Gloria.  Catching Juliet's interest in the boy, she
indicates to her daughter to 'COME ALONG'.

CUT TO: Romeo; a dawning realisation.

                         ROMEO
                   (under his breath)
            Is she a Capulet?

CUT TO: Juliet.  She stops and turns back.

CUT TO: Romeo, comprehending the reality of who she is.

CUT TO: Juliet.  The Nurse whispers in her ear.

                         NURSE
            His name is Romeo, and a Montague,
            The only son of your great enemy.

An orchestral treatment of Joy Division's "Love will tear us
Apart" swells;

HOLD ON: Juliet.  Like a cloud passing across the sun, a
dark coldness descends upon her.

CUT TO: Mercutio.  He throws himself upon the shell shocked
Romeo.

                         MERCUTIO
            Away, begone, the sport is at its
            best.

Mercutio shuttles Romeo toward the door.

                         ROMEO
            Ay so I fear,

A covert glance over his shoulder.

                         ROMEO (CONT.)
            The more is my unrest.

EXT.  CAPULET MANSION.  NIGHT.

Mercutio bundles Romeo through the front door and down the
stairs to the waiting getaway car.

INT.  CAPULET MANSION - STAIRS ALCOVE WINDOW - NIGHT.

CUT TO: Juliet.  Manoeuvred by the Nurse up the stairs, she
breaks away and rushes to a tiny, windowed alcove.

EXT.  CAPULET MANSION - MAIN ENTRANCE.  NIGHT.

CUT TO: Mercutio's convertible and its noisy confederacy
joining the line of departing limos.

A huge sign combusts into blinding fireworks that write in
giant words "CAPULET."

As the convertible passes beneath the blazing words, Romeo
turns.  Through a deluge of falling sparks, he glimpses the
mystery girl high up in the tower.

EXT.  CAPULET MANSION - WINDOW.  NIGHT.

CLOSE ON: Juliet leaning out of the tower window.  Brilliant
sparkles light in her eyes.

PUSH IN: We hear her secret whisper:

                         JULIET
            My only love, sprung from my only
            hate.
            Too early seen unknown, and known
            too late.
            Prodigious birth of love it is to me

EXT.  CAPULET MANSION - MAIN ENTRANCE DRIVE.  NIGHT.

CUT TO: JULIET'S P.O.V.: In slow motion Romeo, through the
falling curtain of fiery embers.

                         JULIET (CONT.)(V/O)
            That I must love a loathed enemy.

EXT.  CAPULET MANSION - WINDOW.  NIGHT.

Warm wind blows the smoke from the expended fireworks.
Juliet closes the window and leans against the glass.

CRANE DOWN: The side of the building past revellers who
don't know when to leave.  Standing in the front doorway is
someone else who cannot take their eyes off the departing
Romeo.  It is Tybalt.  The music darkens as we push through
the smoky wind.

                         TYBALT
            I will withdraw.  But this intrusion
            shall,
            Now seeming sweet, convert to
            bitterest gall.

INT.  MERCUTIO'S CAR.  NIGHT.

Caught in the jam of departing vehicles, Mercutio's car
crawls along the bridge that links Capulet island with the
mainland.  The boys sing along raucously with the radio.

                         BOYS
            "I am a pretty piece of flesh,
            I am a pretty piece of flesh..."

PUSH IN: On Romeo, he whispers:

                         ROMEO
            Can I go forward when my heart is
            here?
            Turn back, dull earth, and find thy
            centre out.

Romeo leaps from the car.  Benvolio yells after him.

                         BENVOLIO
            Romeo!  Cousin Romeo!  Romeo!

EXT.  CAPULET BRIDGE.  NIGHT.

Romeo runs back along the bridge toward the estate.  At the
gates, armed guards supervise the exodus of vehicles.  Romeo
uses the traffic to shield himself from view.

Romeo leaps from the bridge and into the shadows at the base
of the high stone wall that borders the compound.

EXT.  CAPULET BRIDGE.  NIGHT.

Mercutio's car prowls back along the bridge.  The last
guests have departed and the gates are swinging shut.  The
convertible halts in front of them.

                         BENVOLIO
            He ran this way.  Call, good
            Mercutio.

                         MERCUTIO
            Nay, I'll conjure too.

Mercutio leaps from the car.  He postures like a magician in
a low-budget variety special.  The boys cheer him on.

                         MERCUTIO
            Romeo!  Humours!  Madman!  Passion!
            Lover!
            I conjure thee by Rosaline's bright
            eyes,
            By her high forehead and her
            scarlet lip,
            By her fine foot, straight leg, and
            quivering thigh.
            And the demesnes that there adjacent
            lie,
            That in thy likeness thou appear to
            us!

EXT.  CAPULET WALL.  NIGHT.

CLOSE ON: Romeo's fake chain mail shirt tangled in the
barbed wire at the top of the wall.

PAN DOWN: Romeo, now on the other side of the wall, pulls up
his undershirt and gingerly inspects the cuts inflicted by
the wire.

Mercutio's cavorting echoes from the bridge.  Romeo smiles
ironically.

                         ROMEO
            He jests at scars that never felt a
            wound.

Romeo moves off through the darkened grounds of Capulet
estate.

EXT.  CAPULET BRIDGE.  NIGHT.

The boys laugh hysterically as Mercutio staggers around the
bridge in imitation of a love sick fool.

                         MERCUTIO
            O Romeo, that she were, O that she
            were
            An open-arse and thou a poperin pear!

The hilarity is abruptly arrested as a security spotlight
blazes to life, pinning Mercutio in its beam.  The sound of
automatic weapons cocking pierces the night.

CLOSE ON: Mercutio.  He's brave but not stupid.  He gets
back into the car.

                         MERCUTIO (CONT.)
            Come, shall we go?

EXT.  THE BACK OF CAPULET MANSION.  NIGHT.

CLOSE ON: A pair of stone cherubs on top of the retaining
wall of a terraced garden.  Romeo's face appears between them.

Romeo hauls himself up onto the wall.  Below is a Greco-
Roman style pool area.  To the right the darkened rear wing
of Capulet Mansion.  Suddenly the back of the house explodes
with light.  Romeo takes cover.

                         ROMEO
            But soft, what light through yonder
            window breaks?

Romeo's question is answered as out onto the verandah comes
Juliet.  She is still clad in her angel robe, but without
the halo and wings.  She slowly descends to pool level.

                         ROMEO
            It is the East, and Juliet is the
            sun!
            Arise, fair sun, and kill the
            envious moon,
            Who is already sick and pale with
            grief
            That thou her maid art far more
            fair than she.
            Be not her maid, since she is
            envious.
            Her vestal livery is but sick and
            green,
            And none but fools do wear it.
Juliet stands on the top step of the pool stairs.  She is
directly below Romeo as he whispers.

                         ROMEO (CONT.)
            Cast it off!

Juliet sits on the edge of the pool, her legs dangle in the
water.

                         ROMEO (CONT.)
            It is my lady.  O, it is my love!
            O that she knew she were!

Juliet sighs.

                         JULIET
            Ay me!

                         ROMEO
                   (whispers)
            She speaks.
            O, speak again, bright angel!

Juliet looks longingly toward the stars.

                         JULIET
            O Romeo, Romeo! - Whyfore art thou
            Romeo?
            Deny thy father and refuse thy
            name.
            Or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn
            my love,
            And I'll no longer be a Capulet.

CLOSE ON: Romeo.  Incredulous.

                         ROMEO
            Shall I hear more, or shall I speak
            at this?

                         JULIET
            'Tis but thy name that is my enemy.
            Thou are thyself, though not a
            Montague.
            What's Montague?  It is not hand
            nor foot
            Nor arm nor face nor any other part
            Belonging to a man.  O, be some
            other name!
            What's in a name?
            That which we call a rose
            By any other word would smell as
            sweet.
            So Romeo would, were he not Romeo
            called,
            Retain that dear perfection which
            he owes
            Without that title.  Romeo, doff
            thy name,
            And for thy name, which is no part
            of thee,
            Take all myself.

Romeo wildly calls:

                         ROMEO
            I take thee at thy word!
            Call me but love, and I'll be new
            baptised.
            Henceforth I never will be Romeo.

Romeo jumps down from the wall.  Juliet screams, and turns,
toppling backwards.  Romeo grabs her hand but her momentum
overbalances him and they both plunge headlong into the pool.

EXT.  CAPULET MANSION - POOL - UNDERWATER.  NIGHT.

Underwater shot:  A slow motion phosphorescent tangle of
arms, legs and bodies.

EXT.  CAPULET MANSION - BACK GARDEN.  NIGHT.

CUT TO: A security guard.  Alerted by the noise he moves
toward the pool area.

EXT.  CAPULET MANSION - POOL GARDEN - NIGHT.

CUT TO: Above water, real time: Romeo and Juliet surface
spluttering.  Juliet thrashes the water in an attempt to get
distance from her attacker.

                         JULIET
            What man art thou that, thus
            bescreened in night,
            So stumblest on my counsel?

Romeo: A calming gesture as he tries to tread water.

                         ROMEO
            By a name I know not how to tell
            thee who I am:
            My name, dear saint, is hateful to
            myself
            Because it is an enemy to thee.
The ferocious barking of a guard dog arrests the teenagers
attention.  A moment, then they slide beneath the water.

CUT TO: The security guard and dog appearing above the pool
area.

GUARD'S P.O.V.: The rippling surface of the water.

CUT TO - UNDERWATER SHOT: Romeo and Juliet submerged, hair
streaming, stare at each other like two beautiful fish.

CUT TO: The guard.  He can see noisy caterers cleaning up
around the other side of the house.  Frowning, he returns
the way he came.

CUT TO: Romeo and Juliet.  Gasping for air, they cautiously
surface.  A moment - then Juliet, a small smile.

                         JULIET
            Art thou not Romeo, and a Montague?

                         ROMEO
            Neither, fair maid, if either thee
            dislike.

Juliet looks nervously toward the house.  She drags Romeo
toward a small grotto at the end of the pool.

                         JULIET
            How cam'st thou hither, tell me,
            and whyfore?
            The garden walls are high and hard
            to climb,
            And the place death, considering
            who thou art.

                         ROMEO
                   (with splashy bravado)
            With love's light wings did I o'er
            perch these walls.
            For stony limits cannot hold love
            out,
            And what love can do, that dares
            love attempt.
            Therefore thy kinsmen are no stop
            to me.

Juliet drags Romeo firmly into the grotto.

                         JULIET
                   (a real fear)
            If they do see thee, they will
            murder thee.

Romeo slowly pulls Juliet toward him.

                         ROMEO
            I have night's cloak to hide me
            from their eyes.
            And but thou love me, let them find
            me here.
            My life were better ended by their
            hate
            Than death prorogued, wanting of
            thy love.

The lovers kiss long and deep.  Then Juliet, suddenly
fearful, pushes Romeo away.

                         JULIET
            Thou knowest the mask of night is
            on my face,
            Else would a maiden blush bepaint
            my cheek,
            For that which thou hast heard me
            speak tonight.
            Fain would I dwell on form - fain,
            fain deny
            What I have spoke.  But farewell
            compliment!
            Dost thou love me?

Romeo tries to speak, Juliet silences him.

                         JULIET (CONT.)
            I know thou wilt say 'Ay', and I
            will take thy word.  Yet, if thou
            swearest,
            Thou mayst prove false.  O gentle
            Romeo,
            If thou dost love, pronounce it
            faithfully.
            Or if thou think'st I am too
            quickly won,
            I'll frown, and be perverse, and
            say thee nay,
            So thou wilt woo.  But else, not
            for the world.
            In truth, fair Montague, I am too
            fond,
            And therefore thou mayst think my
            'haviour light.
            But trust me, gentleman, I'll prove
            more true
            Than those that have more cunning
            to be strange.

                         ROMEO
            Lady, by yonder blessed moon I vow,
            That tips with silver all these
            fruit-tree tops -

                         JULIET
            O, swear not by the moon, th'
            inconstant moon,
            That monthly changes in her circled
            orb,
            Lest that thy love prove likewise
            variable.

                         ROMEO
            What shall I swear by?

                         JULIET
            Do not swear at all.
            Or if thou wilt, swear by thy
            gracious self,
            Which is the god of my idolatry,
            And I'll believe thee.

She touches his cheek.  Romeo moves his lips close.

                         ROMEO
            If my heart's dear love -

Confused, Juliet breaks away.

                         JULIET
            Well, do not swear.  Although I joy
            in thee,
            I have no joy of this contract
            tonight.
            It is too rash, too unadvised, too
            sudden;
            Too like the lightning, which doth
            cease to be
            Ere one can say 'it lightens.'
            Sweet, good night.
            This bud of love, by summer's
            ripening breath,
            May prove a beauteous flower when
            next we meet.
            Good night, good night.  As sweet
            repose and rest
            Come to thy heart as that within my
            breast.

She rushes up the stairs - Romeo follows desperately.

                         ROMEO
            O, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?

Juliet - a shocked look.

                         JULIET
            What satisfaction canst thou have
            tonight?

CLOSE ON: Romeo.

                         ROMEO
            The exchange of thy love's faithful
            vow for mine.

CLOSE ON: Juliet.  She runs joyously to Romeo.

                         JULIET
            I gave thee mind before thou didst
            request it!

Kissing him passionately.

                         JULIET (CONT.)
            And yet I would it were to give
            again.

                         ROMEO
            Wouldst thou withdraw it?  For what
            purpose love?

                         JULIET
            But to be frank and give it thee
            again.

They kiss again.  The Nurse calls from inside.

                         NURSE (O/S)
            Juliet!

Juliet looks to the house.

                         JULIET
                   (breathlessly)
            Three words, dear Romeo, and good
            night indeed.
            If that thy bent of love be
            honourable.
            Thy purpose marriage, send me word
            tomorrow,
            By one that I'll procure to come to
            thee,
            Where and what time thou wilt
            perform the rite,
            And all my fortunes at thy foot
            I'll lay
            And follow thee my lord throughout
            the world.

                         NURSE (O/S)
            Madam!

                         JULIET
            I come, anon - But if thou meanest
            not well,
            I do beseech thee...

                         NURSE (O/S)
            Madam!

                         JULIET
                   (to Nurse)
            By and by I come!
            To cease thy strife and leave me to
            my grief.
            Tomorrow will I send.

Romeo holds Juliet's gaze.

                         ROMEO
            So thrive my soul.

                         NURSE (O/S)
            Madam!

Juliet breaks away.

                         JULIET
            A thousand times good night!

With a final kiss, Juliet runs inside.

                         ROMEO
            A thousand times the worse, to want
            thy light.
            Love goes toward love as schoolboys
            from their books;
            But love from love, toward school
            with heavy looks.

Juliet re-appears at the upper balcony.

                         JULIET
            Romeo!  What o'clock tomorrow
            Shall I send to thee?

                         ROMEO
            By the hour of nine.

Juliet unclasps a delicate silver necklace from around her
neck.

                         JULIET
            I will not fail. 'Tis twenty year
            till then.
            Goodnight, goodnight!  Parting is
            such sweet sorrow.
            That I shall say goodnight till it
            be morrow.

She lets the necklace fall from her hand.  Romeo catches it
and she is gone.

                         ROMEO
            Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace
            in thy breast,
            Would I were sleep and peace, so
            sweet to rest.

INT.  GREENHOUSE.  DAWN.

Morning sunlight filters through the lush foliage of a
tropical rainforest.

PAN DOWN: As we hear:

                         FATHER LAURENCE (O/S)
            O mickle is the powerful grace that
            lies
            In plants, herbs, stones, and their
            true qualities.

We discover the intensely concentrating features of FATHER
LAURENCE.  Fifties, wiry and wearing a priest's collar,
Laurence delicately makes an incision in the bulb of a small
purple flowered plant.

A pair of fresh faced ten year old boys look on in wonderment
as a vivid blue sap oozes from the incision.

                         FATHER LAURENCE (CONT.)
            Within the infant rind of this weak
            flower
            Poison hath residence, and medicine
            power.

PULL BACK: The Priest carefully gathers the sap into a
beaker.  We discover that we are in a small tropical
greenhouse.

                         FATHER LAURENCE (CONT.)
                   (to the boys)
            For this, being smelt, with that
            part cheers each part;
            Being tasted, stays all senses with
            the heart.
The boys follow the Father as he moves out of the greenhouse
and into an adjoining work area.  The walls are lined with
bottles of herbs and dried plants and a television flickers
in the corner.

                         FATHER LAURENCE (CONT.)
            For naught so vile on the earth
            doth live,
            But to the earth some special good
            doth give;

With the precision of a chemist, Father Laurence funnels the
sap into a small bottle and places it in the refrigerator.
From out of the refrigerator he produces a large jar of
candy.  He eyes the boys sternly.

                         FATHER LAURENCE (CONT.)
            Nor aught so good but, strained
            from that fair use,
            Revolts from true birth, stumbling
            on abuse.

The boys take their candy and scram.

CUT TO: The muted television.  A morning news program shows
footage of a murder scene cordoned off with police tape.  A
distraught mother is being restrained.

CLOSE ON: The priest contemplating the television.

                         FATHER LAURENCE
            Two such opposed kings encamp them
            still
            In man as well as herbs: grace and
            rude will;
            And where the worser is predominant,
            Full soon the canker death eats up
            that plant.

A feverish knocking breaks the priest's reverie.

                         ROMEO (O/S)
            Good morrow, father!

Father Laurence snaps off the television and exits the
workroom.

EXT.  WALL.  DAWN.

Romeo, dressed in last night's chain mail, pounds desperately
on a wooden door set into a high stone wall.

                         ROMEO
            Good morrow, father!

EXT.  COURTYARD.  DAWN.

From the workroom, Father Laurence enters a courtyard which
encloses a tranquil tropical garden.  He opens a door in the
wall of the courtyard and smiles as the costumed Romeo
bursts in.

                         FATHER LAURENCE
            Benedicite!
            What early tongue so sweet saluteth
            me?

Without pausing, the priest continues through the courtyard
and toward the church.

                         FATHER LAURENCE (CONT.)
            Young son, it argues a distempered
            head
            So soon to bid good morrow to thy
            bed.
            Or if not so, then here I hit it
            right -
            Our Romeo hath not been in bed
            tonight.

The priest enters the back of the church.

INT.  SACRISTY.  DAWN.

Romeo, on fire to tell of his experience, follows the priest
into the sacristy.

                         ROMEO
            The last is true.  The sweeter rest
            was mine.

                         FATHER LAURENCE
                   (he stops)
            God pardon sin!  Wast thou with
            Rosaline?

                         ROMEO
            With Rosaline, my ghostly father?
            No.
            I have forgot that name and that
            name's woe.

The Father lays out the cut glass bottles and communion tray
for mass.

                         FATHER LAURENCE
            That's my good son!  But where hast
            thou been then?

Unconsciously, Romeo helps the priest prepare.  It is clear
he knows the routine by heart.

                         ROMEO
            I have been feasting with mine
            enemy,
            Where on a sudden one hath wounded
            me.
            That's by me wounded.  Both our
            remedies
            Within they help and holy physic
            lies.

                         FATHER LAURENCE
                   (buttoning a long
                   black cassock)
            Be plain, good son, and homely in
            thy drift.
            Riddling confession finds but
            riddling shrift.

                         ROMEO
            Then plainly know my heart's dear
            love is set,
            On the fair daughter of rich
            Capulet.
            We met, we wooed, and made exchange
            of vow,
            I'll tell thee as we pass.  But
            this I pray,
            That thou consent to marry us today.

CUT TO: The Priest, thunderstruck.  The two kids, now
dressed in red altar-boy robes, enter.

                         ALTAR BOYS
            Good morrow, Romeo.

The apoplectic priest waves the boys away.  They get the
message and bolt.

                         FATHER LAURENCE
            Holy Saint Francis!  What a change
            is here!
            Is Rosaline, that thou didst love
            so dear,
            So soon foresaken?  Young men's
            love then lies
            Not truly in their hearts, but in
            their eyes.

                         ROMEO
            Thou chid'st me oft for loving
            Rosaline.

                         FATHER LAURENCE
                   (very angry)
            For doting, not for loving, pupil
            mine.

                         ROMEO
            I pray thee chide me not.  Her I
            love now
            Doth grace for grace and love for
            love allow.
            The other did not so.

                         FATHER LAURENCE
            O, she knew well
            Thy love did read by rote, that
            could not spell.

The Father falls into a chair and considers.  He looks
through the sacristy door to where a small children's choir
has assembled.  Their angelic voices soar into the purest of
hymns.

                         CHOIR
            How can you just leave me standing
            Alone in a world so cold,
            Maybe I'm just too demanding,
            Maybe I'm just like my father, too
            bold,
            Maybe you're just like my mother,
            She's never satisfied.
            Why do we scream at each other?
            This is what it sounds like when
            doves cry...

We recognise the hymn as "When Doves Cry" by Prince.

PUSH IN: On the Priest; moved, he looks to Romeo.

                         FATHER LAURENCE
            But come, young waverer, come, go
            with me.
            In one respect I'll thy assistant
            be.
            For this alliance may so happy
            prove
            To turn your households' rancor to
            pure love.

Romeo hurriedly assists the priest with his vestments.

                         ROMEO
            O, let us hence!  I stand on sudden
            haste.

Father Laurence holds Romeo in his powerful gaze.

                         FATHER LAURENCE
            Wisely and slow.  They stumble that
            run fast.

The procession is joined by the two little altar boys and
the mass begins.

EXT.  VERONA BEACH.  DAY.

As the Angelic voices of the choir soar, we see a pay phone
etched with hyper-real starkness against the white sand,
green sea and blue sky.

A single leaning palm tree frames the image like a ridiculous
tourist postcard.

Benvolio speaks on the pay phone.  Mercutio, torso naked but
for his holstered Sports Rapier 9mm, drums his fingers on
the side of the booth.

                         MERCUTIO
            Where the devil should this Romeo
            be?
            Came he not home tonight?

                         BENVOLIO
                   (slamming down the phone)
            Not to his father's.  I spoke with
            his man.

Mercutio storms off down the beach.

                         MERCUTIO
            Why, that same pale hard-hearted
            wench, that Rosaline,
            Torments him so that he will sure
            run mad.

                         BENVOLIO
                   (running to keep up)
            Tybalt hath sent a letter to his
            father's house.

                         MERCUTIO
                   (halts abruptly)
            A challenge, on my life.

CLOSE ON: Benvolio, unsure.

                         BENVOLIO
            Romeo will answer it?

                         MERCUTIO
            Any man that can write may answer a
            letter.

                         BENVOLIO
            Nay, he will answer the letter's
            master, how he dares, being dared.

Mercutio clamps Benvolio into a headlock.

                         MERCUTIO
            Alas, poor Romeo, he is already
            dead!
            Stabbed with a white wench's black
            eye,

He whispers into Benvolio's ear:

                         MERCUTIO (CONT.)
            Run through the ear with a love
            song.
                   (in disgust)
            And is he a man to encounter Tybalt?

                         BENVOLIO
                   (struggling to break free)
            Why, what is Tybalt?

                         MERCUTIO
                   (releasing him)
            More than Prince of Cats, I can
            tell you.
            O, he's the courageous captain of
            compliments.
            The very butcher of a silk button.

Lightening fast, Mercutio draws his gun.  He twirls it in an
impressive display of gunmanship which ends with the barrel
between the startled Benvolio's eyes.

                         MERCUTIO (CONT.)
            A duellist, a duellist.

Romeo's car pulls into the beach side parking lot.  Benvolio
heads toward it.

                         BENVOLIO
            Here comes Romeo, here comes Romeo!

EXT.  BEACH - PARKING LOT.  DAY.

Romeo alights from his car and throws his keys to Balthasar
who lounges outside the beach side hang.  Mercutio saunters
up the beach with mock nonchalance.

                         MERCUTIO
            Signor Romeo, Bonjour.  There's a
            French salutation to your French
            slop.  You gave us the counterfeit
            fairly last night.

                         ROMEO
            Good morrow to you both.  What
            counterfeit did I give you?

                         MERCUTIO
            The slip, sir, the slip.  Can you
            not conceive?

Romeo smiles smugly.

                         ROMEO
            Pardon, good Mercutio.  My business
            was great, and in such a case as
            mine a man may strain courtesy.

                         MERCUTIO
                   (sarcastically)
            A most courteous exposition.

                         ROMEO
            Nay I am the very pink of courtesy.

                         MERCUTIO
                   (camply)
            Pink for flower?

The boys laugh.  Romeo feigns anger.

                         ROMEO
            I will bite thee on the ear for
            that jest!

Mercutio, goading Romeo to follow, backs off down the beach.

                         MERCUTIO
            Come between us, good Benvolio!  My
            wits faint.

Mercutio flicks sand at Romeo, then sprints off down the
beach.  Romeo, laughing, gives chase.

                         ROMEO
            Switch and spurs, switch and spurs,
            or I'll cry a match.

EXT.  BEACH - SHORELINE.  DAY.

Romeo is gaining on Mercutio, who runs headlong into the sea.
With a yell, Romeo dives in after him.

EXT.  BEACH - AT SEA.  DAY.

Mercutio splashes the laughing Romeo.

                         MERCUTIO
            Why, is not this better now than
            groaning for love?

Romeo tries to dunk Mercutio.

                         MERCUTIO (CONT.)
            Now art thou sociable.

Mercutio, evading, heads for shore.

                         MERCUTIO (CONT.)
            Now art thou Romeo.  Now art thou...

EXT.  BEACH - SHORELINE.  DAY.

Romeo tackles Mercutio on the wet sand.  Mercutio falls
suddenly serious.

                         MERCUTIO (CONT.)
                   (quietly)
            What thou art, by art as well as by
            nature.

A moment between the boys.  A shadow falls across them.
Romeo looks up.

                         ROMEO
            Here's goodly gear.

Standing above the boys is the Nurse.  She wears a
ridiculous, all red, "Jackie O" style disguise of sunglasses,
scarf and parasol.

                         MERCUTIO
                   (bemused)
            God ye good e'en fair gentlewoman.

The nurse, ignoring Mercutio, speaks dramatically to Romeo.

                         NURSE
            I desire some confidence with you.

She turns and walks back to the parking lot where Peter the
chauffer waits beside the limousine.

Benvolio and the other boys look on curiously.

                         MERCUTIO
            A bawd, a bawd, a bawd!  So ho!

But Romeo rises and to the amazement of Mercutio actually
follows this woman.  Mercutio looks questioningly to
Benvolio, who shrugs.

                         BENVOLIO
            She will endite him to some supper?

Even more strangely, Romeo gets into the limousine.

                         MERCUTIO
                   (taken by surprise)
            Romeo, will you come to your
            father's?
            We'll to dinner thither.

                         ROMEO
                   (as he closes the door)
            I will follow you.

                         MERCUTIO
            Farewell, ancient lady.  Farewell.

The car pulls away.

EXT.  STREET.  DAY.

The limousine drives through Verona Beach.

INT.  MOVING LIMOUSINE.  DAY.

CLOSE ON: Romeo jammed into the corner of the seat.  The
Nurse's face is pressed alarmingly close to his.  She speaks
in cold deadly earnest.

                         NURSE
            If ye should lead her in a fool's
            paradise, as they say, it were a
            very gross kind of behavior, as
            they say.  For the gentlewoman is
            young; and therefore, if you should
            deal double with her, truly it were
            an ill thing and very weak dealing.

BEAT: Romeo chooses his words carefully.

                         ROMEO
            Bid her to come to confession this
            afternoon,
            And there she shall at Friar
            Laurence's cell
            Be shrived and
                   (PUSH IN ON: Romeo)
            married.

INT.  JULIET'S BEDROOM.  DAY.

CLOSE ON: Juliet's face peering out her bedroom window.

                         JULIET
            O God she comes!

EXT.  CAPULETS MANSION - DRIVEWAY.  DAY.

PULL BACK: JULIET'S P.O.V.: The limousine pulls up at the
front door, the Nurse alights.

Juliet bolts from the room.

INT.  LANDING.  DAY.

Juliet hurries down the stairs - the Nurse, a way ahead,
disappears into a doorway.

INT.  STAIRWAY.  DAY.

Juliet races down a dark stairwell that leads to the bowels
of the house.

INT.  KITCHEN.  DAY.

The kitchen, obviously the Nurse's domain, is decorated with
a mixture of religious iconography and travel posters.  Most
of the posters depict a strange city of decadent, decaying,
beauty.

Juliet bursts breathlessly into the room.

                         JULIET
            O honey nurse, what news?

The Nurse, buried up to her ample hips inside the
refrigerator, does not turn around.

Juliet cries impatiently.

                         JULIET
            Nurse!

The nurse emerges from the ice box laden with food.  Moving
to the counter she starts to make a sandwich.

                         NURSE
            I am aweary, give me leave awhile.
            Fie, how my bones ache.  What a
            jaunce have I.

Juliet under her breath.

                         JULIET
            I would thou hadst my bones and I
            thy news.

Juliet goes to the nurse.

                         JULIET
            Nay come, I pray thee, speak: good;
            good
            Nurse, speak.

Sandwich made, the nurse shuffles over to a corner couch.

                         NURSE
            Jesu, what haste.  Can you not stay
            awhile?
            Can you not see I am out of breath?

Juliet cannot stand the suspense any longer.

                         JULIET
            How art thou out of breath when
            thou hast breath
            To say to me that thou art out of
            breath!
            Is the news good or bad?  Answer to
            that.

The Nurse takes a big bite from her sandwich and answers
through thoughtful chews.

                         NURSE
            Well, you have made a simple
            choice.
            You know not how to choose a man.
            Romeo?  No, not he.
            Though his face be better than any
            man's, yet his leg excels all men's
            and for a hand and a foot and a
            body, though they be not to be
            talked on, yet they are past
            compare.
            He's not the flower of courtesy,
            but I'll warrant him as gentle as a
            lamb.  Go thy ways, wench, serve
            God.  What, have you dined at home?

Juliet is flabbergasted.

                         JULIET
            No, no.  But all this I did know
            before.  What says he of our
            marriage?  What of that

                         NURSE
            Lord how my head aches!  What a
            head have I:
            My back -

This is a game that Juliet knows well.  She moves behind the
Nurse and begins massaging her back.

                         NURSE (CONT.)
            o' t'other side - ah, my back!
            Beshrew your heart for sending me
            about
            To catch my death with jauncing up
            and down.

With sublime self control, Juliet coo's sweetly.

                         JULIET
            I'faith I am sorry that thou art
            not well.
            Sweet, sweet, sweet Nurse, tell me,
            what says my love?

                         NURSE
            Your love says like an honest
            gentleman,
            And a courteous, and a kind, and a
            handsome,
            And I warrant a virtuous - Where is
            your mother?

Juliet cracks.

                         JULIET
            Where is my mother?  How oddly thou
            repliest!
            'Your love says, like an honest
            gentleman, "Where is your mother"'!

The nurse sulks.

                         NURSE
            O God's lady dear are you so hot?
            Henceforth do your messages yourself.

Juliet's frustration explodes.

                         JULIET
            Here's such a coil!  COME WHAT SAYS
            ROMEO?

PAUSE: The Nurse considers Juliet.

                         NURSE
            Have you got leave to go to
            confession today?

                         JULIET
            I have.

                         NURSE
            Then hie you hence to Father
            Laurence cell.
            There stays a husband to make you a
            wife!

Juliet, with a scream of joy, hugs the Nurse to her.

HOLD ON: Juliet's ecstatic features.

INT.  CHURCH.  DAY.

TIGHT ON: FATHER LAURENCE:

                         FATHER LAURENCE
            These violent delights have violent
            ends!

PULL BACK: Father Laurence is preaching energetically from
the pulpit.  Hidden from the congregation, Romeo waits in a
small alcove chapel at the side of the altar.

                         FATHER LAURENCE (CONT.)
            The sweetest honey
            Is loathsome in its own
            deliciousness,
            Therefore love moderately.

The Father glances toward Romeo.

                         FATHER LAURENCE (CONT.)
            Long love doth so.
            Too swift arrives as tardy as too
            slow.
Juliet pushes through the double doors at the far end of the
church.

Father Laurence motions to the middle-aged choir master who
leads the choir into a choral version of Led Zeppelin's "A
Whole Lot of Love" with Latin lyrics.

Father Laurence hurries from the altar over to Romeo.

                         FATHER LAURENCE (CONT.)
            Here comes the lady.

Juliet bursts into the tiny chapel.  Trying to observe a
vestige of decorum, she greets Father Laurence.

                         JULIET
            Good afternoon to my ghostly
            confessor.

But before the priest can reply, the two lovers embrace,
kissing passionately.

                         FATHER LAURENCE
                   (dryly)
            Romeo shall thank thee, daughter,
            for us both.

The choir completes the hymn and the priest, realising it is
his cue, rushes back to the altar.  He quickly delivers a
prayer to the congregation while eyeing the increasingly
amorous smooching of the young couple.

The choir launch into a joyous chorus and the priest returns
to Romeo and Juliet.  He delicately parts the couple.

                         FATHER LAURENCE (CONT.)
            Come, come, and we will make short
            work.
            For, by your leaves, you shall not
            stay alone
            Till Holy Church incorporate two in
            one.

A young boy with a voice like Jamiroquai steps forward.  He
launches into a wailing solo.

MACRO CLOSE UP: A simple silver ring.  Engraved on the
inside of the band are the words 'I love thee.'

PULL BACK: Romeo slips the ring onto Juliet's finger as the
priest executes the formal sacrament of marriage.
INT./EXT.  CHURCH.  DAY.

CRANE UP: Through the majestic patterning of stained glass,
and out of the church to find Peter, the chauffeur, cradling
a small camera as he waits nervously beside the limo.

EXT.  CHURCH.  DAY.

The music swells in celebration.  Romeo and Juliet, now
newly-wed, rush from the side door of the church.  The
priest follows, throwing handfuls of rice.  Peter studiously
takes a snap as the bride and groom kiss.

Peter holds the door of the limousine open.  Reluctantly
Juliet gets into the car.

As the car pulls out of the driveway, Romeo runs alongside.

HOLD: On Romeo as he watches the big black car speed away.

EXT.  UNDERWATER.  DAY.

FISH-EYE VIEW: From the bottom of the ocean; Mercutio's
distorted features.  Gun aimed, he stares intently into the
water.

A muffled BANG! and a bullet whizzes past the camera.

EXT.  VERONA BEACH.  DAY.

We see that Mercutio - wading in knee deep water close to
the beach - is hunting fish.

Benvolio shelters in the shade of an unmanned life guard
tower.

A shimmering heat haze blankets the deserted beach and the
horizon is stacked with purple storm clouds.

                         BENVOLIO
            I pray thee, good Mercutio, let's
            retire.
            The day is hot,

Mercutio, ignoring him, plugs away at another fish.  Benvolio
nervously looks to see if there is any reaction to the sound
of the shot.

                         BENVOLIO (CONT.)
            The Capels are abroad.  And if we
            meet we shall not 'scape a brawl.

Mercutio strides out of the water.

                         MERCUTIO
            Thou art like one of these fellows
            that, when he enters the confines
            of a tavern, claps me his sword
            upon the table and says 'God send
            me no need of thee!'
                   (he hands Benvolio
                   his gun)
            and by the operation of the second
            cup draws him on the drawer, when
            indeed there is no need.

Another incredible sleight of hand routine and Mercutio has
managed to draw Benvolio's pistol, retrieve his own gun, and
trap Benvolio with a barrel at each temple.

The joke has worn thin for Benvolio; he pushes past Mercutio
toward where Balthasar, Sampson and Gregory lounge in the
shade of the beach-side hang.

Suddenly he stops dead - a monstrous black sedan prowls into
the beach side parking lot.

                         BENVOLIO
            By my head, here comes the Capulets.

                         MERCUTIO
            By my heel, I care not.

EXT.  BEACH - PARKING LOT.  DAY.

The sedan mounts the curb and slides to a halt only metres
from Benvolio and Mercutio.

Tybalt, Abra and Petruchio alight from the sedan and walk
menacingly toward Mercutio and Benvolio.

                         TYBALT
            Gentlemen, good day.  A word with
            one of you.

The boys from the hang, drawn the Capulet car, converge -
eyes dart nervously, hands stray towards guns.

Mercutio smiles mockingly.

                         MERCUTIO
            And but one word with one of us?
            Couple it with something.  Make it
            a word and a...

Leaning close to Tybalt, he camps the implication.

                         MERCUTIO (CONT.)
            ...blow.

Mercutio scores.  The boys laugh.

                         TYBALT
                   (furious)
            You shall find me apt enough to
            that, sir,
                   (clutching at his
                   side arm)
            And you will give me occasion.

CLOSE ON: Mercutio.  He stops, eyeing the hand on the gun.
No one moves.

                         MERCUTIO
                   (a breathy, coquettish
                   voice)
            Could you not take some occasion
            without giving?

The boys fall about again.  Tybalt cracks.

                         TYBALT
            Mercutio, thou consortest with Romeo.

The accusation stings - Mercutio's anger flares.

                         MERCUTIO
            Consort?  What, dost thou make us
            minstrels?  And thou make minstrels
            of us look to hear nothing but
            discords.  Here's my fiddlestick.

Indicating his holstered gun.

                         MERCUTIO (CONT.)
            Here's that shall make you dance.
                   (barking at Tybalt)
            Zounds,
                   (goading him to go
                   for his gun)
            consort!

CLOSE ON: Tybalt.

CLOSE ON: Mercutio.  He will not back down.  Benvolio tries
to diffuse things.

                         BENVOLIO
            Either withdraw unto some private
            place.
            Or reason coldly of your grievances.
            Here all eyes gaze on us.

                         MERCUTIO
            Men's eyes were made to look, and
            let them gaze.
            I will not budge for no man's
            pleasure, I.

At that moment, Romeo's car pulls into the lot.  Tybalt
smiles.

                         TYBALT
            Well sir, here comes my man.

Tybalt moves toward Romeo who bounds from his car full of
happy news.

                         TYBALT
            Romeo, the love I bear thee can
            afford
            No better term than this:

CLOSE ON: Tybalt.  He clears his jacket from his side arm
and issues the challenge.

                         TYBALT (CONT.)
            Thou art a villain!

CLOSE ON: Mercutio.

CLOSE ON: Benvolio.

All eyes are on Romeo.

Romeo calmly approaches his now cousin.

                         ROMEO
            Tybalt, the reason that I have to
            love thee
            Doth much excuse the appertaining
            rage
            To such a greeting: villain am I
            none,
            Therefore farewell.  I see thou
            knowest me not.

Romeo turns, and to the amazement of all, walks back to his
car.  Tybalt, unable to shoot him in the back, is confused.
He hurls himself into his sedan.

Kicking it into a sand spraying U-turn, he careens the short
distance to Romeo's car.  Slamming into the back of it he
blocks Romeo in.

Tybalt leaps out, maniacally kicking at bumper, door and
headlights.  Romeo flicks the locks down.  Tybalt shatters
the side window and hauls Romeo through the door, slamming
him against the savaged fuselage.

                         TYBALT
            Boy, this shall not excuse the
            injuries
            That thou hast done me!

He smashes Romeo across the face, Romeo crashes to the
roadway.

                         TYBALT
                   (yelling)
            Turn and draw.

A cut has opened in the side of Romeo's mouth.  He unsteadily
lifts himself up, and meeting Tybalt's gaze, speaks through
bloodied teeth.

                         ROMEO
            I never injured thee,
            And so, good Capulet, which name I
            tender
            As dearly as mine own...

Romeo cautiously extracts his gun...

                         ROMEO (CONT.)
            ...be satisfied.

...and throws it at Tybalt's feet.

Storm clouds obscure the sun as Romeo turns and walks from
the parking lot.

Mercutio, Benvolio and the others cannot believe their eyes.

                         MERCUTIO
            O calm, dishonourable, vile
            submission!

EXT.  BEACH - VACANT LOT.  DAY.

Tybalt's anger must be answered.  He ceremoniously disarms,
gives his weapon to Abra, and sprints after Romeo who is now
passing a beach side lot that houses an abandoned grand
hotel.  A bone-cracking kick sends Romeo crumbling into the
vacant lot.  The boys swarm toward the fray.
Romeo, still refusing the fight, scrambles up the stairs of
the deserted hotel.  Tybalt trips him and Romeo careens into
an ornamental wooden railing, smashing it to pieces.

Tybalt kicks savagely at the helpless Romeo.

Suddenly, Mercutio appears running full tilt down the
concrete terrace.  He plucks up one of the splintered wooden
palings and yells...

                         MERCUTIO (CONT.)
            Tybalt, you ratcatcher,

...as he bludgeons him across the face.  Tybalt goes down.

                         MERCUTIO (CONT.)
            Will you walk?

Tybalt leaps to his feet grabbing a lump of wood.

                         TYBALT
            What wouldst thou have with me?

He swipes at Mercutio.

                         MERCUTIO
                   (avoiding)
            Good King of Cats, nothing but one
            of your nine lives.

Mercutio jabs, Tybalt sidesteps.

                         TYBALT
            I am for you.

Tybalt aims a double-handed blow to Mercutio's head.
Mercutio blocks, hooking Tybalt's stick away.

Unarmed, Tybalt throws his full body weight upon Mercutio,
slamming him against a window that shatters in a storm of
glass.

Lightning fast, Mercutio jackknifes to his feet.  He raises
his weapon to deliver a skull-crushing final blow to the
trapped Tybalt.  Romeo rushes between them.

                         ROMEO
            Forbear this outrage, good Mercutio!

Seizing the opportunity, Tybalt lunges at Romeo with a
lethal triangle of broken glass.  He misses, gouging instead
a slash of flesh from Mercutio's stomach.
A scream of excruciating pain as Mercutio grabs at his
bloodied side.  Everyone is still.  In the abrupt silence,
sirens are heard closing in the distance.  Abra tugs at
Tybalt.

                         ABRA
            Away Tybalt!

They bolt for their vehicle.

Benvolio goes to Mercutio.

                         BENVOLIO
            Art thou hurt?

But Mercutio, covering his wound with his hand, laughs.

                         MERCUTIO
            Ay, ay, a scratch.

He turns to his assembled fans at the bottom of the stairs.
With outrageous bravado he plays at being Caesar the
conqueror.

                         MERCUTIO (CONT.)
            A scratch!

The boys cheer their conquering hero.  Romeo helps Mercutio
down the stairs.

                         ROMEO
            Courage, man.  The hurt cannot be
            much.

Mercutio holding his bleeding side, jokes through the pain.

                         MERCUTIO
            'Twill serve.  Ask for me tomorrow
            and you shall find me a grave man.

He turns the next thought to the assembled audience.

                         MERCUTIO (CONT.)
                   (through crazy laughter)
            A plague o' both your houses!

Mercutio turns from the cheering boys to Romeo who is
struggling to support his weight.

Mercutio - through weak and desperate breathing.

                         MERCUTIO (CONT.)
            Why the devil came you between us?
            I was hurt under your arm.
Romeo starts to register the panic in Mercutio's eyes.

                         ROMEO
            I thought all for the best.

Like an animal trying to break free from a mortal trap,
Mercutio pushes Romeo away.  He screams in horror, as if
falling in the dark:

                         MERCUTIO
            A plague o' both your houses!
            They have made worms' meat of me.

Mercutio staggers down the stairs and collapses in the dirt.
Romeo is there instantly, cradling his friend's head out of
the dust.  The dying boy stares back at Romeo, smiling
through the chilling cold.

                         MERCUTIO (CONT.)
                   (a silent whisper)
            Your houses!

Everything stands still, everything is quiet.  The storm
finally breaks.

EXT.  BEACH - RAIN.  DAY.

Tiny drops of water fall from the sky and bespeckle
Mercutio's lifeless body.  The droplets grow to a heavy rain.
Romeo can hear the faint sound a thousand miles away of
Benvolio whispering:

                         BENVOLIO
            Mercutio is dead!

Tears streak Romeo's face.  He cries out.

                         ROMEO
            Oh sweet Juliet,
            Thy beauty hath made me effeminate
            And in my temper softened valor's
            steel!

The sound of Tybalt's vehicle starting brings back cold
reality.  Romeo's sorrow turns to uncontrollable rage.

Shrugging aside Benvolio's attempts to restrain him, Romeo
runs to his car.

EXT.  BEACH - PARKING LOT.  DAY.

Up ahead Tybalt's sedan screeches into a fishtailing U-turn
and powers away.
Romeo jumps into his vehicle.  In an effort to head Tybalt
off, he guns his damaged machine down a one way street.

The rain is now blinding.  Romeo stops for nothing;
pedestrians flee, cars spin out of control.

EXT.  VERONA BEACH STREETS - FROM AIR.  DAY.

AERIAL SHOT: The two cars speed along parallel roads toward
Plaza Jesu.  Romeo is gaining.

EXT.  VERONA STREET - CHRIST ROUNDABOUT.  DAY.

CUT TO: Tybalt's car negotiating the immense roundabout at
the foot of the statue of Jesus.

EXT.  CHRIST ROUNDABOUT.  DAY.

CUT TO: Romeo's car firing out of the one way street and
slamming into Tybalt's car.  Tybalt's car careens out of
control up the stairs of the statue, clips the fountain,
flips, and slides upside down onto the roadway.

CUT TO: Tybalt scrambling from his upturned vehicle.

CUT TO: Romeo running toward him.

SUDDENLY Romeo is halted by Tybalt's drawn gun.  Fearlessly
marching toward it, he screams through tears.

                         ROMEO
            Mercutio's soul
            Is but a little way above our heads,

Romeo grabs the barrel of the gun; forcing it between his
own eyes, he growls insanely at Tybalt.

                         ROMEO (CONT.)
            Staying for thine to keep him
            company.

Tybalt, unnerved, tries to back off.

                         TYBALT
            Thou, wretched boy, shalt with him
            hence.

Romeo, refusing to let go of the gun, forces Tybalt backward
through the torrential rain.

                         ROMEO
                   (with frightening intensity)
            Either thou or I, or both, must go
            with him.

Cars swerve, Romeo is relentless.  He grips Tybalt's hand
trying to force him to shoot.

                         ROMEO (CONT.)
            Either thou or I, or both, must go
            with him.

Panicked, Tybalt wrenches free and lurches onto the roadway.
Blinded by the headlights of an oncoming car he thuds onto
its hood as it skids to a halt.  The impact catapults his
gun high into the air.

Romeo coldly follows its slow motion, spinning trajectory.

Real time stretches as the gun dances high above his head.
Police sirens, cars swerving, people screaming, and the
yelling of panicked commands fade to a nothingness.

Romeo stands calmly considering the gun in the air.  A
harrowing symphonic tone and the echo of Mercutio's voice
can be heard.

                         MERCUTIO (V/O)
            Why the devil came you between us?

CUT TO: Patrol cars sliding to a halt.

CUT TO: The spinning gun slowly falling to earth.

CUT TO: Tybalt rising from the ground.

CUT TO: Cops leaping from their cars.

CUT TO: The gun landing in Romeo's hand.  His eyes full of
rage.

CUT TO: Cops levelling their revolvers.

                         COP
                   (Romeo in his sights)
            Put up thy weapon.

CUT TO: Real time - Romeo fires three deliberate shots.
Tybalt's body convulses backwards against the car, hitting
it with a thud, bloodying the shattered windscreen.

The cop fires.  A bullet grazes Romeo's arm - his gun drops
as he screams.

                         ROMEO
            O, I am fortune's fool!

At that moment a roaring hurricane wind hits; blinding police.

CLOSE ON: The scaffolding surrounding the Jesus statue.
Part of it's canvas covering rips away.  Scaffold rains down
as the insanely flapping material tries to smash free from
it's moorings.

Through the mayhem, a rusty Ford driven by Balthasar, slides
to a halt.

Balthasar screams out at Romeo.

                         BALTHASAR
            Romeo, away be gone!  Stand not
            amazed!

Romeo collapses into the front seat.

The cops open fire as Balthasar speeds off into the storm.

INT.  BALTHASAR'S CAR.  AFTERNOON.

Romeo is bleeding from the bullet graze.

EXT.  CAUSEWAY.  AFTERNOON.

The gale-force winds throw waves across the causeway as the
fugitives disappear into the black afternoon.

CRANE UP: In the distance we see Montague and Capulet towers.
Divided by the statue of Christ, they suffer the storm's rage.

EXT.  MONUMENT.  AFTERNOON.

Away, below the outstretched arms of Christ, lights from
emergency vehicles pulse red through the downpour.

THE CAMERA: Falls through heavy rain toward a woman crouched
over the lifeless body of Tybalt.

She cries:

                         GLORIA
            Tybalt!

Cops nervously eye Fulgencio Capulet and Ted Montague, who,
both flanked by body guards, face each other across the
crime scene.  Medics stand by helplessly as Gloria clings to
Tybalt's body.  A handcuffed Benvolio looks on.

                         GLORIA (CONT.)
            Tybalt, my cousin, O my brother's
            child!
            O, the blood is spilled of my dear
            kinsman.

Police lines part as Captain Prince arrives.

                         CAPTAIN PRINCE
            Where are the vile beginners of
            this fray?

Benvolio struggles forward.

                         BENVOLIO
            O noble Prince I can discover all
            The unlucky manage of this fatal
            brawl.

Gloria appeals hysterically:

                         GLORIA
            Prince as thou art true,
            For blood of ours shed blood of
            Montague!

                         CAPTAIN PRINCE
            Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?

                         BENVOLIO
                   (pointing to Tybalt's corpse)
            There lies the man, slain by young
            Romeo,
            That slew thy kinsman brave Mercutio.

Gloria interjects savagely.

                         GLORIA
            He speaks not true!  Affection
            makes him false!

                         BENVOLIO
            Romeo, that spoke him fair, could
            not take
            Truce with the unruly spleen of
            Tybalt
            Deaf to peace!

                         GLORIA
            He is a kinsman to the Montague!
            I beg for justice which thou Prince
            must give.
            Romeo slew Tybalt, Romeo must not
            live!

Captain Prince turns to Gloria.
                         CAPTAIN PRINCE
            Romeo slew him, he slew Mercutio.
            Who now the price of his dear blood
            doth owe?

Ted Montague pleads:

                         MONTAGUE
            Not Romeo, Prince, he was Mercutio's
            friend; His fault concludes but
            what the law should end,
            The life of Tybalt.

Captain Prince eyes Montague coldly.

                         CAPTAIN PRINCE
            And for that offence
            Immediately we do exile him.

Montague, body guards in tow, surges forward.

                         MONTAGUE
            Noble Prince...?

Prince silences him.

                         CAPTAIN PRINCE
            I will be deaf to pleading and
            excuses;
            Nor tears nor prayers shall purchase
            out abuses.
            Therefore use none.

The Captain turns and addresses his assembled officers.

                         CAPTAIN PRINCE (CONT.)
            Let Romeo hence in haste,
            Else, when he is found that hour is
            his last.

CLOSE ON: Captain Prince.

                         CAPTAIN PRINCE (CONT.)
            Bear hence this body and attend our
            will.
            Mercy but murders, pardoning those
            that kill.

INT.  JULIET'S BEDROOM.  AFTERNOON.

An acoustic guitar version of Joy Division's 'Love Will Tear
Us Apart.' Juliet traces the path of a raindrop on the
window pane as she speaks her thoughts to the storm.

                         JULIET
            Come gentle night, coming loving
            black browed night,
            Give me my Romeo.  And when I shall
            die,
            Take him and cut him out in little
            stars,
            And he will make the face of heaven
            so fine
            That all the world will be in love
            with night,
            And pay no worship to the garish
            sun.
            O, I have bought the mansion of a
            love
            But not possessed it, and though I
            am sold,
            Not yet enjoyed.  So tedious is
            this day
            As is the night before some festival
            To an impatient child that hath new
            robes
            And may not wear them.

EXT.  CAPULET'S MANSION - DRIVEWAY.  AFTERNOON.

Juliet's P.O.V.: The limousine pulls into the driveway.

PULL OUT: Of the window and CRANE DOWN: Juliet runs from the
room.

EXT.  CAPULET MANSION.  AFTERNOON.

Through the open doorway we see an excited Juliet meet the
Nurse at the bottom of the stairs.

The music surges.

TRACK IN: The Nurse's words are lost in the storm.

Juliet buckles.

INT.  CAPULET MANSION.  AFTERNOON.

We are close enough now to hear Juliet's words.

                         JULIET
            Oh God!  Did Romeo's hand shed
            Tybalt's blood?

                         NURSE
            It did, it did!  Alas the day, it
            did!

                         JULIET
            Oh serpent heart, hid with a
            flowering face.
            Was ever book containing such vile
            matter
            So fairly bound?  O, that deceit
            should dwell
            In such a gorgeous palace!

                         NURSE
            There's no trust, No faith, no
            honesty in men.  All perjured,
            All forsworn, all naught, all
            dissemblers.
            Shame come to Romeo.

                         JULIET
            Blistered be thy tongue
            For such a wish!  He was not born
            to shame.  Upon his brow shame is
            ashamed to sit.

                         NURSE
            Will you speak well of him that
            killed your cousin?

                         JULIET
            Shall I speak ill of him that is my
            husband?
            Ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall
            smooth thy name
            When I, thy three-hours wife have
            mangled it?
            But whyfore, villain, didst thou
            kill my cousin?
            That villain cousin would have
            killed my husband.
            All this is comfort, wherefore weep
            I then?
            Some word there was worser than
            Tybalt's death:
            I would forget it fain - exiled.
            Tybalt is dead, and Romeo exiled.
            To speak that word is father,
            mother,
            Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet, all slain,
            All dead.

Juliet sinks to the floor, overwhelmed by tears.

                         JULIET (CONT.)
            Nurse, I'll to my wedding bed,
            And death, not Romeo, take my
            maidenhead.

Nurse looks down at Juliet.  She goes and comforts her.

                         NURSE
            Hie to your chamber.  I'll find
            Romeo
            To comfort you.  I know well where
            he is.
            Hark ye, your Romeo will be here at
            night.

Juliet looks up through tears.

                         JULIET
            O find him, give this ring to my
            true knight,
            And bid him come to take his last
            farewell.

SLAM MACRO ZOOM: Into the ring.  The screen fills with the
words 'I love thee'.

INT.  PRESBYTERY BEDROOM.  NIGHT.

Romeo lies on the bed shirtless and crying.  His wound has
been bandaged and Balthasar crouches frightened in the corner.

The priest leads the Nurse into the room.

Romeo looks up.

                         ROMEO
            Nurse!

She goes to him.

                         NURSE
            Ah sir!  Ah sir!  Death's the end
            of all.

                         ROMEO
            Speakest thou of Juliet?
            Where is she?  And how doth she?
            And what says
            My concealed lady to our cancelled
            love?

                         NURSE
            O, she says nothing, sir, but weeps
            and weeps,
            And then on Romeo cries, and then
            falls down again.

Romeo is wailing inconsolably.
                         ROMEO
            As if that name,
            Shot from the deadly level of a
            gun,
            Did murder her, as that name's
            cursed hand murdered her kinsman!

Father Laurence shakes the hysterical boy.

                         FATHER LAURENCE
            I thought thy disposition better
            tempered!
            Thy Juliet is alive, There art thou
            happy.
            The law that threatened death
            becomes thy friend
            And turns it to exile.  There art
            thou happy.
            A pack of blessings light upon thy
            back.

Romeo calms.  The Nurse gives him the ring.

                         NURSE
            Here sir, a ring my lady bid me
            give you.

Romeo enfolds the ring in his hand.

                         ROMEO
            How well my comfort is revived by
            this.

The priest goes to his wardrobe, removes a clean white shirt
and helps Romeo put it on.

                         FATHER LAURENCE
            Go, get thee to thy love, as was
            decreed.
            Ascend her chamber.  Hence and
            comfort her.
            But look thou stay not till the
            Watch be set,
            For then thou canst not pass to
            Mantua where thou shalt live till
            we can find a time
            To blaze your marriage, reconcile
            your friends,
            Beg pardon of the Prince and call
            thee back,
            With twenty hundred thousand times
            more joy
            Than thou wentst forth in
            lamentation.

Father Laurence ushers Romeo from the room.

INT.  HALLWAY.  NIGHT.

They hurry down the hallway.

The priest opens the front door.

                         FATHER LAURENCE
            Go hence.  Be gone by the break of
            day
            Sojourn in Mantua.  Give me thy hand.

Romeo embraces him.

                         ROMEO
            Farewell.

The priest and Balthasar watch as Romeo and the Nurse sprint
for the car.

INT.  CAPULET MANSION.  NIGHT.

Sobs echo through the house.

Dave Paris stands in the entrance hallway clutching a huge
bunch of flowers.

Fulgencio Capulet stands beside him, whisky glass in hand.

CUT TO: Gloria on the upper landing.  There is a strange
faraway quality about her as she descends to Dave and Capulet.

                         GLORIA
            She'll not come down tonight.

Dave, an understanding smile.

                         DAVE
            These times of woe afford no times
            to woo.

Capulet guides Dave into the house.

                         CAPULET
            Look you, she loved her kinsman
            Tybalt dearly.

                         GLORIA
                   (joining)
            And so did I.

                         CAPULET
                   (a cold glance at Gloria)
            Well, we were born to die.

Capulet takes a large slug of whisky.  Gloria leans close to
Dave.

                         GLORIA
            I'll know her mind early tomorrow.
            Tonight she's mewed up to her
            heaviness.

As Gloria, Dave and Capulet exit down the hallway we CRANE
UP: toward Juliet's bedroom door.

INT.  JULIET'S BEDROOM.  NIGHT.

CLOSE ON: Juliet's face.  Tears stream onto the pillow.
Without warning a hand lightly touches her cheek.  Juliet's
eyes dart up to discover Romeo standing above her.

A still moment of disbelief.  Leaning down, Roemo kisses
away the tears that fall from her dark, wide eyes.

Juliet's lips find Romeo's and they gently sink back onto
the bed.

INT.  SITTING ROOM.  NIGHT.

Capulet sits in an armchair drinking.  Dave and Gloria sit
opposite as Capulet whips himself into a frenzy of drunken
excitement.

                         CAPULET
            We'll keep no great ado - a friend
            or two.
            For, hark you, Tybalt being slain
            so late,
            It may be thought we held him
            carelessly,
            Being our kinsman if we revel
            much -
            But soft what day is this?

                         DAVE
            Monday my lord.

                         CAPULET
            Well Wednesday is too soon - what
            say you to Thursday?

Gloria looks up alarmed; Dave is stunned.

                         DAVE
            My lord I...

                         CAPULET
                   (leaning close)
            I will make a desperate tender of
            my child's love.
                   (a drunken good humour)
            I think she will be ruled in all
            respects by me;
                   (exploding with
                   hearty laughter)
            Nay, more, I doubt it not!

CUT TO: Gloria, her face hardens.

                         CAPULET
                   (to Dave)
            But what say you to Thursday?

Dave is trying to catch up.

                         DAVE
            My lord I...

CUT TO: Capulet he eyes Dave intently.

                         DAVE (CONT.)
            I would that Thursday were tomorrow.

Delighted, Capulet jumps to his feet.

                         CAPULET
            A Thursday let it be then!

Capulet holds out his glass in toast.  Dave and Gloria rise.

                         CAPULET
            Wife, go you to Juliet ere you go
            to bed.
            Tell her, a Thursday she shall be
            married
            To this noble sir!

CLOSE ON: The glasses clink.

EXT.  CAPULET ESTATE.  DAWN.

A pink and gold dawn breaks over Capulet Mansion.

INT.  JULIET'S BEDROOM.  DAWN.

A tangle of young limbs.

Romeo and Juliet blissfully asleep.  The dawn light creeps
into the room.

EXT.  CAPULET ESTATE.  DAWN.

Balthasar's car covertly pulls into a side road near the
estate.

INT.  JULIET'S BEDROOM.  DAWN.

Romeo and Juliet still asleep.

CRANE DOWN: Toward the sleeping innocence of the faces.

HOLD: A shadow of fear passes across Romeo's features.

With a cry of panic, he sits bolt upright.

Wide awake, but disorientated, Romeo stares around the
room - as Juliet stirs, he remembers where he is.

Slipping quietly from the bed, Romeo begins to dress.

CLOSE ON: Romeo.  A pair of lips enter frame and find his
neck.  It is Juliet.  She hugs herself to him.

                         JULIET
            Wilt thou be gone?  It is not yet
            near day.

Romeo turns - softly he strokes her cheek.

                         ROMEO
            I must be gone and live, or stay
            and die.

Juliet kisses his finger-tips.

                         JULIET
            Yond light is not daylight,

And then his cheek...

                         JULIET (CONT.)
            I know it, I
            It is some meteor that the sun
            exhales
            To light thee on thy way to Mantua.
            Therefore stay yet.  Thou needest
            not to be gone.

Romeo, feverishly returning the kisses, throws himself on
Juliet.

                         ROMEO
            Let me be taken, let me be put to
            death.
            I have more care to stay than will
            to go.
            Come, death, and welcome!  Juliet
            wills it so.

Juliet is suddenly still.  Romeo kisses her gently.

                         ROMEO (CONT.)
            How is't, my soul?  Let's talk.  It
            is not day.

Juliet pulls Romeo to his feet.

                         JULIET
            It is, it is!  Hie hence, be gone,
            away!
            O, now be gone!  More light and
            light it grows.

Frantically she helps him into his clothes.

                         ROMEO
            More light and light: more dark and
            dark our woes.

There is an urgent knocking on the door.  They freeze.

                         NURSE (O/S)
            Madam!

                         JULIET
            Nurse!

                         NURSE (O/S)
            Your lady mother is coming to your
            chamber.

                         JULIET
            Then, window, let day in, and let
            life out.

Desperately Juliet pulls Romeo out onto the balcony.

EXT.  BALCONY.  DAWN.

The storm, now past, has left a morning achingly pure.

                         ROMEO
            Farewell, farewell.  One kiss, and
            I'll descend.
Romeo climbs down from the balcony and into the shadows.

                         JULIET
            O, think'st thou we shall ever meet
            again?

Romeo smiles up at her.

                         ROMEO
            I doubt it not;

Juliet's face darkens.

                         JULIET
            O God, I have an ill-divining soul.
            Methinks I see thee, now thou art
            so low,
            As one dead in the bottom of a tomb.

Romeo scrambles back up to the balcony.

                         ROMEO
            Trust me, love, all these woes
            shall serve
            For sweet discourses in our times
            to come.

From Juliet's bedroom comes the brittle sound of Gloria
Capulet's voice.

                         GLORIA
            Ho daughter!  Are you up?

Juliet spins around.  Gloria has parted the curtains and is
staring directly at her daughter.

                         GLORIA
            Well, well.

CUT TO: Romeo sheltered just below the lip of the balcony.

FOLLOW: His hand, as it slowly reaches up and touches
Juliet's fingers hidden behind her back.

Gloria returns to the room.  Juliet steals a glance toward
Romeo as he silently mouths:

                         ROMEO
            Adieu, adieu!

As Romeo's face disappears into the shadows Juliet whispers
a little prayer to herself.

                         JULIET
            O Fortune, Fortune!  Be fickle,
            Fortune,
            Fo then I hope thou wilt not keep
            him long
            But send him back.

INT.  JULIET'S BEDROOM.  DAWN.

Juliet is trying not to cry as she goes in to her mother.
Gloria turns to her.

                         GLORIA
            Thou hast a careful father, child:
            One who, to put thee from thy
            heaviness,
            Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy
            That thou expects not nor I looked
            not for.

Juliet plays along.

                         JULIET
            Madam, in happy time.  What day is
            that?

Gloria takes a deep breath.

                         GLORIA
            Marry, my child, early next Thursday
            morn
            The gallant, young, and noble
            gentleman,
            Sir Paris, at Saint Peter's Church,
            Shall happily make thee there a
            joyful bride.

CLOSE ON: Juliet.  She can barely speak.

                         JULIET
            Now by Saint Peter's Church, and
            Peter too,
            He shall not make me there a joyful
            bride!

Fear passes across Gloria's face.

                         GLORIA
            Here comes your father.  Tell him
            so yourself.

Capulet - whisky glass in hand - ebulliently bursts into the
room.

                         CAPULET
            How now, wife?
            Have you delivered to her our decree?

                         GLORIA
            Ay, sir.  But she will none, she
            gives you thanks.
            I would the fool were married to
            her grave!

Capulet - a dangerous calm.

                         CAPULET
            How?  Will she none?
            Is she not proud?  Doth she not
            count her blest,
            Unworthy as she is, that we have
            wrought
            So worthy a gentleman to be her
            bride?

                         JULIET
            Not proud you have, but thankful
            that you have.
            Proud can I never be of what I hate.

PAUSE: Capulet considers his daughter, then -

BAM!  He hurls his glass against the wall, shattering it
into a thousand pieces.

                         CAPULET
            Thank me no thankings, nor proud me
            no prouds,
            But fettle your fine joints 'gainst
            Thursday next ...

Capulet advances.  Juliet, terrified, retreats into the
hallway.

                         JULIET
            Hear me with patience but to speak
            a word...

INT.  LANDING.  DAY.

The Nurse appears as Capulet picks his daughter up and
shakes her like a rag doll.

                         CAPULET
            Speak not, reply not, do not answer
            me!

He throws her to the floor.  His fist thuds as it slams into
her face.

                         GLORIA
                   (screaming)
            Fie, fie!  What are you mad?

Gloria tries to restrain Capulet.  He back-hands her,
sending her flying against the wall - bellowing insanely, he
advances on his cowering daughter.

                         CAPULET
            Hang thee, young baggage!
            Disobedient wretch.

The Nurse throws herself between Capulet and Juliet.

                         NURSE
            God in heaven bless her!
            You are to blame, my lord, to rate
            her so.

Furious, Capulet shunts her aside.

                         CAPULET
            Peace, you mumbling fool!

Capulet yanks his daughter's face close to his.

                         CAPULET (CONT.)
            I tell thee what - get thee to
            church a Thursday
            Or never after look me in the face.
            And you be mine, I'll give you to
            my friend.
            And you be not, hang, beg, starve,
            die in the streets,
            Trust to it.  Bethink you.  I'll
            not be forsworn.

Capulet storms off down the hall.

CLOSE ON: Juliet.  She huddles, shaking at the top of the
stairs.

                         JULIET
            O sweet my mother, cast me not
            away!
            Delay this marriage for a month, a
            week.
            Or if you do not, make the bridal
            bed
            In that dim monument where Tybalt
            lies.

A trickle of blood issues from Gloria's cut lip.  She checks
her appearance in the hall mirror.

                         GLORIA
            Talk not to me, for I'll not speak
            a word.
            Do as thou wilt, for I have done
            with thee.

Gloria leaves.

                         JULIET
            O God! - O Nurse, how shall this be
            prevented?

The Nurse doesn't reply.

                         JULIET (CONT.)
            What sayest thou?  Hast thou not a
            word of joy?
            Some comfort, Nurse.

A heavy silence.

The Nurse goes to Juliet.

                         NURSE
            Faith, here it is.
            I think it best you married with
            this Paris.
            O, he's a lovely gentleman!
            I think you are happy in this
            second match,
            For it excels your first; or if it
            did not,
            Your first is dead - or 'twere as
            good he were
            As living here and you no use of him.

Juliet is very still.

                         JULIET
            Speakest thou from thy heart?

                         NURSE
            And from my soul too.  Else beshrew
            them both.

                         JULIET
            Amen.

                         NURSE
                   (unsure)
            What?

Juliet is matter of fact.

                         JULIET
            Well, thou hast comforted me
            marvellous much.
            Go in; and tell my lady I am gone,
            Having displeased my father, to
            Friar Laurence,
            To make confession and to be
            absolved.

The old woman nods.  She strokes Juliet's hair.

                         NURSE
            This is wisely done.

Juliet does not look up.

A disturbing choral chant:

                                            DISSOLVE TO:

INT.  CHURCH.  DAY.

Sunlight pierces stained glass - the chant a sinister
underscoring.  We hear Dave Paris' voice:

                         DAVE (O/S)
            Immoderately she weeps for Tybalt's
            death...

CRANE DOWN: Father Laurence and Dave Paris stand at the
front of the church.

                         DAVE (CONT.)
            ...Now, sir, her father counts it
            dangerous
            That she doth give her sorrow so
            much sway,
            And in his wisdom hastes our
            marriage
            To stop the inundation of her
            tears...

Father Laurence turns.  Juliet stands framed in the white
glare of the doorway.

Dave smiles.

                         DAVE
            Happily met, my lady and my wife.

CLOSE ON: Juliet's hand concealed beneath her coat - we can
just see the handle of a gun.

Juliet advances slowly, an icy calm:

                         JULIET
            That may be, sir, when I may be a
            wife.

                         DAVE
            That 'may be', must be, love, on
            Thursday next.

Juliet stares past Dave.

                         JULIET
            What must be, shall be.

Father Laurence, a forced cheerfulness.

                         FATHER LAURENCE
            That's a certain text.

                         DAVE
            Come you to make confession?

Juliet forces a smile.

                         JULIET
            Are you at leisure, holy father,
            now?
            Or shall I come to you at evening
            mass?

                         FATHER LAURENCE
            My leisure serves me, pensive
            daughter, now.
                   (to Dave)
            We must entreat the time alone.

                         DAVE
            God shield I should disturb
            devotion! - Juliet, on Thursday
            early will I rouse ye;

Dave bends.

CLOSE ON: Juliet; she stares stonily ahead as Dave kisses
her cheek.

                         DAVE (CONT.)
            Till then, adieu, and keep this
            holy kiss.

Dave leaves.

TRACK WITH: Juliet; she runs for the sacristy.

The priest follows.

INT.  SACRISTY.  DAY.

Juliet, shaking with sobs takes refuge in the shadows of the
small room.

The priest goes to her.

                         FATHER LAURENCE
            O Juliet, I already know thy grief.

Juliet pulls away.

                         JULIET
            Tell me not, Father, that thou
            hearest of this,
            Unless thou tell me how I may
            prevent it.

                         FATHER LAURENCE
            It strains me past the compass of
            my wits.

                         JULIET
                   (desperately)
            If in thy wisdom thou canst give no
            help
            Do thou but call my resolution
            wise,
            And with this I'll help it presently!

She pulls the gun, pointing it towards herself.

Horrified, Father Laurence moves to her.

Juliet, panicked, levels the gun at him.

                         FATHER LAURENCE
            Hold daughter!

                         JULIET
                   (through tears)
            Be not so long to speak.  I lone to
            die!

Father Laurence holds out a soothing hand.

                         FATHER LAURENCE
            I do spy a kind of hope,
            Which craves as desperate an
            execution
            As that is desperate which we would
            prevent.
            If, rather than marry Paris,
            Thou hast the strength of will to
            slay thyself,
            Then it is likely thou wilt
            undertake
            A thing like death...

We hear the distended chords of Faur's Requiem.

                         FATHER LAURENCE (CONT.)
            to chide away this shame...

It continues throughout as;

The entire screen fills with a glinting tear drop of blue
liquid.

Reflected in the fluid's convex surface, the face of Father
Laurence.

The face disappears as the tear drop falls and splashes into
a clear water solution.

Like a comet in slow motion, the drop stains the water a
cobalt hue.

INT.  GREENHOUSE WORKROOM.  DAY.

PULL BACK: The blue liquid fills a tiny glass vial held by
Father Laurence.

                         FATHER LAURENCE (CONT.)
            No warmth, no breath shall testify
            thou livest.
            Each part, deprived of supple
            government,
            Shall stiff and stark and cold
            appear, like death.
            Now when the bridegroom in the
            morning
            Comes to rouse thee from thy bed,
            there art thou, dead.
            Thou shalt be borne to that same
            ancient vault
            Where all the kindred of the
            Capulets lie.
            In the meantime, against thou shalt
            awake,
            Shall Romeo by my letters know our
            drift,
            And hither shall he come.
            And that very
            Night shall Romeo bear thee hence
            to Mantua.

The priest cautiously hands Juliet the vial.

                         FATHER LAURENCE (CONT.)
            Take thou this vial, being then in
            bed,
            And this distilling liquor drink
            thou off.
            I'll send my letters to thy lord
            with speed to Mantua.

EXT.  CHURCH.  DAY.

As Father Laurence speaks, the screen fills with an express
envelope addressed "Romeo - Mantua." The envelope pulls away
from the camera and falls into a canvas bag brimming with
hundreds of like envelopes.

TRACK: With the canvas bag.  It continues its journey into
the back of an express delivery van.

Heavy double doors slam shut, filling the screen with the
slogan 'Speed Express.'

The van pulls away.

                                            DISSOLVE TO:

EXT.  MANTUA.  DAY.

A burning red sun is setting over an endless vista of ragged
wasteland.

CRANE DOWN: A weathered sign reads - Mantua: Behind it a
vast colony of permanent trailer homes stretches into the
distance.

The rap, rap, rap of knocking echoes through the park...

CUT TO: The source of the knocking.  An express delivery
man, envelope in hand, raps vigorously on the door of an
unremarkable trailer.

INT.  TRAILER.  DAY.

TOPOGRAPHICAL SHOT: Romeo lies flat on a single bed in the
crampled trailer.

The rap, rap, rap is very loud now.  We move toward Romeo
and realise he cannot hear the knocking because he has
Walkman headphones on.

EXT.  TRAILER.  DAY.

Unsuccessful, the delivery man is filling out a "WE CALLED"
card.  He pushes it under the door.

                                            DISSOLVE TO:

INT.  CAPULET MANSION.  NIGHT.

The heraldic 'Wedding Chimes' by JS Bach.  Juliet stands
resplendent in a radiant bridal gown.  The image floats
ethereally in a towering slab of mirror.

PULL OUT: From the mirror.  The wedding dress is in fact
being held in front of Juliet by two members of the house
staff.  Juliet is dressed in her night gown.  The Nurse
suggests various pairs of shoes.

                         JULIET
                   (disinterested)
            Ay, these attires are best.

The fuss dispensed with, the staff leave.

                         JULIET
            But, gentle Nurse,
            I pray thee leave me to myself
            tonight.

                         NURSE
            Why Bride?

Juliet navigates the Nurse toward the door.

                         JULIET
                   (almost in tears)
            To move the heavens to smile upon
            my state,
            Which, well thou knowest, is cross
            and full of sin.

Juliet holds the Nurse in a pleading stare.  She leaves.

Alone now, Juliet hurries to her bedside drawer.  She
cautiously removes a rolled piece of cloth from which she
produces the glass vial.

                         JULIET
                   (whispers)
            What if this mixture do not work at
            all?
            Shall I be married then tomorrow
            morning?

She cautiously begins to unscrew the tiny black lid.
Suddenly, a knock at her door.  Palming the vial, Juliet
swings around to meet the arrival of her mother.  Gloria
probes her daughter's uneasiness.

                         GLORIA
            What, are you busy, ho?  Need you
            my help?

                         JULIET
                   (makes light of it)
            No, madam.  We have culled such
            necessaries
            As are behoveful for our state
            tomorrow.
            So please you, let me now be left
            alone,
            And let the Nurse this night sit up
            with you.

Juliet begins to pull down the covers on her bed.

                         JULIET (CONT.)
            For I am sure you have your hands
            full all
            In this so sudden business.

Gloria, sensing Juliet's distress, moves cautiously toward
her.  Taking hold of the bed covers she helps her daughter
into bed.

                         GLORIA
            Good night.

Juliet slides into bed.  Gloria covers her with the blanket.

                         GLORIA (CONT.)
            Get thee to bed, and rest, for thou
            hast need.

A brief moment between mother and daughter.  Gloria, unable
to cross that final barrier, moves to the door; but she is
stopped by the urgency in Juliet's voice.

                         JULIET
            Farewell!

Gloria turns to Juliet.

                         JULIET (CONT.)
            God knows when we shall meet again.

CLOSE ON: Gloria.  A faint perplexity, and then with an
almost warm smile she turns out the light and leaves.

The room is in darkness but for patterns of moonlight
through windows.

TRACK: Toward Juliet.  The sombre tones of Faur's Requiem
seep into our consciousness.

                         JULIET
            I have a faint cold fear thrills
            through my veins
            That almost freezes up the heat of
            life.

She brings the vial her mouth.

                         JULIET (CONT.)
            Come, vial.  Romeo, I drink to thee.

Juliet drinks, a sudden violent convulsion, her face contorts
in fear.

                                            DISSOLVE TO:

EXT.  CAPULET ESTATE.  DAY.

The sky is filled with green and grey clouds.  A gusty rain
blows the flower arrangements across the lawn.  Large white
wedding marquees flap in the wind.

Through blurring rain, we see ambulances and police vehicles,
lights flashing.  Father Laurence, accompanied by a dour
looking man in black, alights from his car.  We follow their
P.O.V.: We hear snatches of radio calls.

                         MEDIC ONE (OVER RADIO)
            Mortal drugs?

                         MEDIC TWO (OVER RADIO)
            Of lethal quantity as 'twould
            render death.

INT.  CAPULET MANSION - DINING ROOM.  DAY.

They enter the house and pass the vast dining room, bedecked
with wedding decorations.

Capulet sits at the large mahogany table.  In the background
Gloria stares vacantly.

Moving swiftly toward a doorway, the music builds.

INT.  CAPULET MANSION - JULIET'S BEDROOM.  DAY.

The door opens.  On the bed Juliet's still body.  Father
Laurence closes the door.  The priest kneels and hastily
examines Juliet's pupils.  He looks to the man in black who
retrieves the glass vial from the floor and pockets it.

                         FATHER LAURENCE
                   (to the man in black)
            As the custom is,
            In all her best array bear her to
            church.

When the man in black allows two other dark suited men into
the room, it becomes clear he is the undertaker.

                         UNDERTAKER
            She shall be borne to that same
            ancient vault
            Where all the kindred of the
            Capulets lie.

INT.  MAUSOLEUM.  DAY.

A thousand voices proclaim the 'Song of Ascension.'

PAN DOWN: From the vaulting glass ceiling of the Capulet
mausoleum.

On view, enshrined in literally thousands of lit candles, is
Juliet's peaceful body.

We move through lines of Capulet mourners.  In the shadows
of the front door a young man hides.

CLOSE ON: The young man.  We recognise the distressed face
of Balthasar.

PUSH IN: Balthasar rushes from the Mausoleum.

EXT.  MANTUA.  DAY.

We are high above Mantua.  Beyond the trailer park stretches
a long ribbon of black highway.

As a Speed Express van turns off the highway and into the
park, we hear Romeo's voice over:

                         ROMEO (V/O)
            If I may trust the flattering truth
            of sleep
            My dreams presage some joyful news
            at hand...

CRANE DOWN: The Express van pulls up at the front office.
The driver alights and goes inside.

INT.  TRAILER.  DAY.

Romeo sits at the trailer's small kitchen table smoking and
writing in his notebook.  The "WE CALLED" card lies next to
an overflowing ashtray.

His voice over continues.

                         ROMEO (V/O)
            And all this day an unaccustomed
            spirit
            Lifts me above the ground with
            cheerful thoughts.
            I dreamt my lady came and found me
            dead
            And breathed such life with kisses
            in my lips
            That I revived and was an emperor.
            Ah me, how sweet is love itself
            possessed
            When but love's shadows are so rich
            in joy.

Stubbing out his cigarette, Romeo gazes through the trailer
window to see Balthasar's speeding car turn off the highway
and into the trailer park.

                         ROMEO
            News from Verona!

An excited Romeo rushes from the trailer.

EXT.  TRAILER PARK.  DAY.

CRANE HIGH: Romeo sprints across open ground to intercept
Balthasar's car.  We see, but Romeo cannot, the Express van
approaching from the office.  The car slews to a halt and
Balthasar jumps out.

Romeo yells joyously.

                         ROMEO
            How now, Balthasar?

Bathlasar cannot speak.

                         ROMEO (CONT.)
            Dost thou not bring me letters from
            the Priest?
            How doth my lady?  Is my father
            well?
            How doth my lady Juliet?  That I
            ask again,
            For nothing can be ill if she be
            well.

Balthasar does not know how to say what he has come to tell.
He looks away.

                         BALTHASAR
            Then she is well and nothing can be
            ill.
            Her body sleeps in Capels' monument,
            And her immortal part with angels
            lives.
            I saw her laid low in her kindred's
            vault.

For a long moment Romeo is profoundly still.  When he
speaks, it is with a chilling calm.

                         ROMEO
            Is it e'en so?

Balthasar nods.

Romeo turns and stares into the distant wasteland.

CLOSE ON: He speaks with bitter determination.

                         ROMEO
            Then I defy you stars.

Romeo moves to the car.

                         ROMEO
            I will hence tonight.

Balthasar tries to restrain him.

                         BALTHASAR
            Have patience...

Exploding with fury, Romeo throws Balthasar against the
vehicle.

                         ROMEO
            Leave me!

CUT TO: The Speed Express messenger.  Returning to his
truck, the priest's undelivered envelope in his hand, the
messenger looks toward the two boys.

CUT TO: The boys.  Balthasar pleads with Romeo.

                         BALTHASAR
            Your looks are pale and wild and do
            import
            Some misadventure.

                         ROMEO
                   (with cold serenity)
            Tush, thou art deceived.
                   (a niggling thought)
            Hast thou no letters to me from the
            Priest?

Balthasar shakes his head.

Romeo smiles.

                         ROMEO
            No matter - I will hence tonight.

Romeo climbs into the passenger seat of the car.  Balthasar
reluctantly gets behind the wheel.

As silent tears begin to flow, Romeo turns his face to the
setting sun.

PUSH IN: As he whispers:

                         ROMEO
            Well Juliet, I will lie with thee
            tonight.

Balthasar's car roars out of the park.

CUT TO: The delivery man.  He looks to the envelope in his
hand, then gets back into his truck.

EXT.  HIGHWAY.  NIGHT.

Balthasar's car speeds along the night-time highway.

CRANE UP: In the distance the glow of city lights.

EXT.  ALLEYWAY.  NIGHT.

Balthasar's car pulls into an alley and stops outside a
decrepity apartment block.
INT.  APARTMENT BLOCK.  NIGHT.

CLOSE ON: A bespectacled eye peers through the crack of a
partly open doorway.  Below the face, the barrel of a
shotgun protrudes menacingly.

CUT TO: Romeo in the dark, paint peeling hallway.

                         ROMEO
            Let me have
            A dram of poison, such soon-
            speeding gear
            As will disperse itself through all
            the veins
            That the life-weary taker may fall
            dead.

The eye considers, a voice rasps back.

                         APOTHECARY
            Such mortal drugs I have, but
            Verona's law
            Is death to any he that utters them.

Romeo speaks with fury.

                         ROMEO
            The world is not thy friend, nor
            the world's law.
            Then be not poor, but break it and
            take this.

Romeo shoves a wad of money at THE APOTHECARY'S face.

BEAT.  The rattle of a latch chain and the door swings open.

Standing in the doorway is The Apothecary.  Sixty something,
he has a face scarred with age and abuse.

                         APOTHECARY
            My poverty, but not my will consents.

CLOSE ON: Romeo.

                         ROMEO
            I pay thy poverty and not thy will.

INT.  PRESBYTERY.  NIGHT.

CLOSE ON: Father Laurence.  He speaks into the telephone
with concern.

                         FATHER LAURENCE
            Who bore my letter then to Romeo?

INT.  SPEED EXPRESS DEPOT.  NIGHT.

A bored clerk is on the other end of the line.  The priest's
letter is on the counter beside him.

                         CLERK
            I could not sent it - here it is
            again.

INT.  PRESBYTERY.  NIGHT.

Father Laurence is worried.

                         FATHER LAURENCE
            By my brotherhood, unhappy fortune!
            The letter was of dear import.
                   (PAUSE: the priest listens)
            Adieu.

He hangs up the receiver and looks at the wall clock.

                         FATHER LAURENCE (CONT.)
            Now must I to the monument alone.
            Within this hour will fair Juliet
            awake.

DISSOLVE FROM: The clock to...

INT.  APOTHECARY'S APARTMENT.  NIGHT.

CLOSE ON: A cat skitters across a stained formica table.

PULL BACK: The Apothecary's apartment is filled with cats.
Dozens of feline eyes glow in the dim room.  Romeo stands
nervously.  The Apothecary extracts a small chemist's vial
from inside a 'Statue of Our Lady' table lamp - he now
speaks with cool professionalism.

                         APOTHECARY
            Drink it off and if you had the
            strength of twenty men it would
            dispatch you straight.

Romeo takes the vial and hands over the money.

                         ROMEO
            There is my gold - worse poison to
            men's souls
            Than these poor compounds that thou
            mayst not sell.

INT.  BALTHASAR'S CAR.  NIGHT.

Motor running, Balthasar waits in the alley outside the
apartment building.  He checks the rear view mirror and
freezes.  At the end of the alleyway a police car crawls to
a halt.

EXT.  ALLEYWAY.  NIGHT.

Romeo exits the building, and as he does so, the streetlight
catches his face.  The Cop's and Romeo's eyes meet.

INT.  POLICE CAR.  NIGHT.

CLOSE ON: The cop.

                         COP
            This is that banished haughty
            Montague.

INT.  BALTHASAR'S CAR.

Balthasar cracks; he guns the engine and the car lurches
forward.

EXT.  ALLEYWAY.  NIGHT.

Tires screech as Romeo dives into the passenger seat of
Balthasar's moving vehicle.

Siren blaring, the police car gives chase.

AERIAL SHOT.  NIGHT.

Balthasar's car winds through traffic - the patrol car
gaining.

EXT.  ANOTHER PART OF TOWN.  NIGHT.

A police car U-turns over a median strip.

EXT.  BALTHASAR'S CAR.  NIGHT.

TIGHT ON: A rusted brown hood.

The tortured engine screams as Balthasar negotiates the
speeding car through city traffic.

CRANE UP: Red and blue police light approach fast.

INT.  PRECINCT OFFICE.  NIGHT.

Captain Prince barrels through the corridors of police
headquarters pulling on his flying jacket.

EXT.  STREET.  NIGHT.

TIGHT ON: A smoking tire as it lays rubber to the asphalt.

Balthasar grits his teeth as he weaves the car through the
impossibly tight space between a container truck and a bus.

WHIP PAN: The patrol car is almost upon them when... in a
seemingly suicidal manoeuvre Balthasar throws his car into a
right-angle turn across four lanes of oncoming traffic.
Horns blare.

CUT TO: A skidding, squealing, out of control sedan, braking
to avoid collision.

Miraculously, Balthasar's vehicle shoots out of it its path
and onto the other side of the roadway.

The sedan slams into the following patrol car.

EXT.  DRIVEWAY.  NIGHT.

Balthasar's car speeds into the driveway of the Verona Beach
Eternal Rest Cemetery.

INT.  CHOPPER.  NIGHT.

Captain Prince scans the night time city below.  He speaks
to the pilot and the chopper banks sharply.

EXT.  CEMETERY.  NIGHT.

CLOSE ON: A stone angel etched against the night sky.

PAN DOWN: Romeo pulls a crowbar from the trunk of the parked
car.  Police sirens sound in the distance.

Romeo eyes Balthasar intently.

                         ROMEO
            Upon thy life, whatever thou
            hearest
            Or seest, stand all aloof.  Give me
            the light -

Balthasar stands motionless - Romeo rips the torch from his
hands and strides into the cemetery.  Balthasar follows.

                         BALTHASAR
            I do beseech you...

Romeo turns, punching Balthasar hard; he goes down, blood
spurting from his nose.

                         ROMEO
            Do not interrupt me in my course or
            By heaven I will tear thee joint by
            joint
            And strew this hungry churchyard
            with thy limbs!

Balthasar slowly rises.  Both boys are trying hard not to cry.

                         ROMEO (CONT.)
            The time and my intents are savage
            wild,
            More fierce and more inexorable far
            Than empty tigers or the roaring sea.

                         BALTHASAR
            I will be gone and not trouble ye.

Romeo smiles.

                         ROMEO
            So shalt thou show me friendship.

They embrace as Romeo whispers.

                         ROMEO (CONT.)
            Live, and be prosperous; and
            farewell, good fellow.

EXT.  MAUSOLEUM.  NIGHT.

CLOSE ON: A crowbar wrenches at ornate glass and iron doors.

PULL BACK: The Gothic structure of the mausoleum rears
against the night sky.  Romeo frenziedly attacks the gates
of the small side chapel.

                         ROMEO
            Thou detestable maw, thou womb of
            death,
            Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to
            open.

With a final heave the doors scrape open.

Silence.

ROMEO'S P.O.V.: An endless marble corridor lit by hundreds
of tiny flickering eternal flames.

CLOSE ON: Romeo.  He murmurs:
                         ROMEO
            In despite I'll cram thee with more
            food.

Suddenly a hurricane wind and whirr of machinery: like a
huge black insect, Captain Prince's chopper swoops down over
the mausoleum.

Romeo is caught in the glare of the chopper's burning arc
light.  Sirens scream, police units race through the cemetery.
Blinded, Romeo fires wildly toward the chopper.

The police cars screech to a halt.

CLOSE ON: A police marksman in the chopper.  His finger
squeezes the rifle trigger.

BANG!  A bullet slams into Romeo's shoulder.  The other cops
open fire and Romeo is sent reeling backwards into the
mausoleum in a fusillade of bullets.

INT.  CHOPPER.  NIGHT.

An angry Captain Prince bellows into the radio.

                         CAPTAIN PRINCE
            Hold!  Hold!

The police hold their fire.

INT.  MAUSOLEUM.  NIGHT.

Bleeding from the shoulder wound, Romeo drags shut the heavy
double doors of the chapel.  He bangs off three shots
through a pane of broken glass and screams at the police.

                         ROMEO
            Stand all aloof!

EXT.  MAUSOLEUM.  NIGHT.

Outside the chopper hovers.  Police take up siege positions.
Captain Prince's voice echoes through the bullhorn.

                         CAPTAIN PRINCE
            Romeo, come forth, come forth.

INT.  MAUSOLEUM.  NIGHT.

Romeo uses the crowbar to wedge the doors shut.  He bangs
off another shot as he yells out at the Police.

                         ROMEO
            Tempt not a desperate man!

Romeo waits.  There is no response from the cops.

INT.  CHOPPER.  NIGHT.

As the chopper settles to earth, Captain Prince speaks into
the radio.

                         CAPTAIN PRINCE
            Bring forth these enemies Montague
            and Capulet.

INT.  PRIEST'S CAR.  NIGHT.

Orange rescue lights reflect through the windshield of the
priest's car as it crawls past the crashed sedan and police
vehicle.

Father Laurence thumps the steering wheel in frustration.

                         FATHER LAURENCE
            Saint Francis be my speed tonight!

Across the road Police swarm around the entrance to the
cemetery.

                         FATHER LAURENCE
            Fear comes upon me.
            O, much I fear some ill unthrifty
            thing.

HOLD ON: The green glow of the car clock as the seconds
pulse away.

INT.  MAUSOLEUM.  NIGHT.

TRACK: Down the marble corridor lit by the eternal flames.

DISCOVER: Romeo.  He weakly stands at the entrance to the
viewing chapel.

The chapel is dark.

As Romeo's eyes adjust he can just see, picked out by a
shaft of blue moonlight, the glowing figure of a sleeping
girl.  He moves down the aisle past the tombs of long-dead
Capulets.

Romeo is close now.  He halts as if in the presence of an
unbelievable vision.  He lights a match and the room glows
gold.  The warm light reveals a Juliet even more beautiful
in seeming death.

Romeo lights some of the hundreds of candles that surround
her.

                         ROMEO
            O my love, my wife,
            Death, that hath sucked the honey
            of thy breath,
            Hath had no power yet upon thy
            beauty,
            Thou art not conquered.  Beauty's
            ensign yet
            Is crimson in thy lips and in thy
            cheeks,
            And death's pale flag is not
            advanced there.

Romeo kneels close, as if not wanting to wake a sleeping
child.  Unconscious tears fall from his eyes as he whispers.

                         ROMEO (CONT.)
            Ah, dear Juliet, why art thou yet
            so fair?
            Shall I believe that unsubstantial
            death
            Is amorous and keeps thee here in
            dark
            To be his paramour?  For fear of
            that
            I still will stay with thee.  Here,
            oh here
            Will I set up my everlasting rest
            And shake the yoke of inauspicious
            stars
            From this world-wearied flesh.

He lays himself close.

                         ROMEO (CONT.)
            Eyes, look your last.
            Arms, take your last embrace.  And,
            lips, O you
            The doors of breath, seal with a
            righteous kiss...

Gently Romeo kisses Juliet's lips.  Ever so slightly,
Juliet's hand moves - Romeo does not notice.

                         ROMEO (CONT.)
            A dateless bargain to engrossing
            death.

Romeo drinks from the vial; the power of the compound is
immediate.  He convulses and falls, his head resting on
Juliet.

                         ROMEO (CONT.)
                   (fighting for breath)
            O true apothecary, thy drugs are
            quick.

Behind Romeo's head we can see Juliet's eyes opening.  Romeo
sucks the last few breaths of life into his lungs.  Through
a blurry consciousness Juliet becomes aware of Romeo.

                         JULIET
            Oh Romeo, what's here?

Forcing herself up, she cradles his head in her arms.
Romeo's clear wide eyes stare back, he is completely still
but for the sound of weak breaths desperately drawn across
motionless lips.

Juliet finds the vial clenched in Romeo's hand.  Tears slip
from her eyes.

                         JULIET (CONT.)
            Drunk all, and left
            No friendly drop to help me after.
            I will kiss thy lips.
            Haply some poison yet doth hang on
            them
            To make me die with a restorative.

She delicately kisses Romeo's lips.

                         JULIET (CONT.)
                   (a heart-broken whisper)
            Thy lips are warm.

Desperately the lovers cling to each other.  With all his
desire to stay alive, Romeo whispers:

                         ROMEO
            Thus with a kiss I die.

There is no breath.  He is still.  Silence.  Sobbing, Juliet
hugs the lifeless Romeo to her.

                         JULIET
            Romeo.  O' my true love Romeo.

She looks to the gun in his hand.

EXT.  MAUSOLEUM.  NIGHT.

TRACK: Quickly past Captain Prince and the Capulets taking
cover behind a patrol car.

Two police officers urgently convey Montague and his wife
toward them.

Discover Father Laurence arriving.

CUT TO: Father Laurence's P.O.V.: Patrol cars, lights
flashing, surround the mausoleum.

He sees, through the open door of a police car, a hand-
cuffed youth.  It is Balthasar.  Father Laurence hurries to
him.

It is dawning on Father Laurence.

                         FATHER LAURENCE
            Balthasar?

                         BALTHASAR
                   (desperately)
            I brought news of Juliet's death...
            And then in post came Romeo from
            Mantua
            To this same place... to this same
            monument.

CLOSE ON: Father Laurence.

                         FATHER LAURENCE
            How long hath he been there?

                         BALTHASAR
            Full half an hour.

Father Laurence turns towards the mausoleum.

                         FATHER LAURENCE
            Romeo.
                   (a shock of realisation)
            The lady stirs...

INT.  MAUSOLEUM.  NIGHT.

TRACK SLOW TOWARD: Juliet: Sobbing uncontrollably she prises
the gun from Romeo's hand.

EXT.  MAUSOLEUM.  NIGHT.

Father Laurence, desperate, breaks through the police line
and runs toward the mausoleum.

CUT TO: The parents and Captain Prince.

                         CAPTAIN PRINCE
            Hold!  Go not forth!

INT.  MAUSOLEUM.  NIGHT.

Juliet turns the gun on herself.

EXT.  MAUSOLEUM.  NIGHT.

CLOSE ON: Father Laurence, he screams as he mounts the
mausoleum stairs.

                         FATHER LAURENCE
            The lady stirs!

CRACK!  The sound of a single gun shot rips through the night.

CUT TO: Captain Prince.

CUT TO: The parents, a look of cold shock.

CUT TO: The priest - his cry echoes through the night.

INT.  MAUSOLEUM.  NIGHT.

Juliet lies peacefully on Romeo's chest.  Her eyes awake.  A
wash of deep red blood floods across them both.  As we move
away from the forms of the two young lovers lit by a ring of
candles, the police burst in, guns ready to resolve what has
already been resolved.  Continuing up, we pass through the
glass dome of the viewing chapel, and over the building.

EXT.  MAUSOLEUM.  NIGHT.

There, huddled at the base of the Mausoleum steps, are the
Montague and Capulet parents and Father Laurence.

From high up we see Captain Prince emerge from the Mausoleum
and speak to the group.  A moment, then their cries float
gently up.

EXT.  SKY.  NIGHT.

We are travelling high into the sky now.  The cries of the
parents and the buzz of radio calls fade to nothing.

EXT.  VERONA BEACH STREET - CHRIST ROUNDABOUT-FROM AIR.  DAWN.

As the sun struggled to rise, we push toward the figure of
Jesus silently surveying the city.

EXT.  VERONA BEACH - CHRIST ROUNDABOUT.  DAWN.

As Jesus' face fills the screen, droplets of water begin to
streak his cheeks.

HOLD: Music swells; the droplets grow to a torrent, and a
heavy rain begins to fall.

For a long beat, we stay with this image.

CRANE DOWN: From the Jesus.  A sea of black umbrellas
stretches back from the steps of Freedom Tower.

EXT.  FREEDOM TOWER.  DAY.

At the top of the steps are a pair of flower strewn caskets.
Before the caskets stand Fulgencia and Gloria Capulet, and
Ted and Caroline Montague.  They stare with blank,
uncomprehending sorrow.

Among the crowd we see the distraught faces of Benvolio,
Balthasar, Father Laurence and the Nurse.

The caskets are gently slid into a pair of long black cars.
Montague and Capulet descend the stairs.  Captain Prince
blocks their path.  He holds them in his gaze.

                         CAPTAIN PRINCE
            See what a scourge is laid upon
            your hate,
            That heaven finds means to kill
            your joys with love;
            And I, for winking at your discords
            too,
            Have lost a brace of kinsmen.  All
            are punished.

The Prince steps aside.  The procession moves off.  Montague
and Capulet look to one another, a moment, and then the two
adversaries together follow the bodies of their dead children.

AERIAL SHOT: The rain falls.  Two black cars lead the people
of Verona Beach in a sorrowful parade.

As the cars pass beneath the towering effigy of Jesus, the
image pixilates into a television picture.

PULL OUT: A TV anchor woman watches the image on a studio
monitor.

She turns:

                         ANCHOR WOMAN
                   (to camera)
            A glooming peace this morning with
            it brings:
            The sun for sorrow will not show
            his head.
            Go hence, to have more talk of
            these sad things.
            Some shall be pardoned, and some
            punished,
            For never was a story of more woe
            Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.

The anchor woman changes beat to the next story; but her
dialogue fades, and her image gets smaller as the television
recedes into a black distance.

The music that reminds us most of these two lost lives
swells.  When the television is very small it is switched off.

BLACK SCREEN.  HOLD A BEAT.

                         END CREDITS


RAP GOD
"Look, I was gonna go easy on you not to hurt your feelings."
"But I'm only going to get this one chance."
"Something's wrong, I can feel it."
Six minutes. Six minutes. Six minutes, Slim Shady, you're on!
"Just a feeling I've got. Like something's about to happen, but I don't know what. If that means what I think it means, we're in trouble, big trouble; and if he is as bananas as you say, I'm not taking any chances."
"You are just what the doc ordered."

[Chorus]
I'm beginnin' to feel like a Rap God, Rap God
All my people from the front to the back nod, back nod
Now who thinks their arms are long enough to slap box, slap box?
They said I rap like a robot, so call me Rap-bot

[Verse 1]
But for me to rap like a computer it must be in my genes
I got a laptop in my back pocket
My pen'll go off when I half-cock it
Got a fat knot from that rap profit
Made a livin' and a killin' off it
Ever since Bill Clinton was still in office
With Monica Lewinsky feelin' on his nutsack
I'm an MC still as honest
But as rude and as indecent as all hell
Syllables, skill-a-holic (kill 'em all with)
This flippity dippity-hippity hip-hop
You don't really wanna get into a pissin' match
With this rappity brat, packin' a MAC in the back of the Ac'
Backpack rap crap, yap-yap, yackety-yack
And at the exact same time, I attempt these lyrical acrobat stunts while I'm practicin' that
I'll still be able to break a motherfuckin' table
Over the back of a couple of faggots and crack it in half
Only realized it was ironic, I was signed to Aftermath after the fact
How could I not blow? All I do is drop F-bombs
Feel my wrath of attack
Rappers are havin' a rough time period, here's a maxi pad
It's actually disastrously bad for the wack
While I'm masterfully constructing this masterpice

[Chorus]
'Cause I'm beginnin' to feel like a Rap God, Rap God
All my people from the front to the back nod, back nod
Now who thinks their arms are long enough to slap box, slap box?
Let me show you maintainin' this shit ain't that hard, that hard
Everybody want the key and the secret
To rap immortality like I have got

[Verse 2]
Well, to be truthful the blueprint's
Simply rage and youthful exuberance
Everybody loves to root for a nuisance
Hit the Earth like an asteroid
Did nothing but shoot for the Moon since (Pew!)
MCs get taken to school with this music
'Cause I use it as a vehicle to "bus the rhyme"
Now I lead a new school full of students
Me? I'm a product of Rakim
Lakim Shabazz, 2Pac, N.W.A, Cube, hey Doc, Ren
Yella, Eazy, thank you, they got Slim
Inspired enough to one day grow up, blow up and be in a position
To meet RunD.M.C., induct them
Into the motherfuckin' Rock and Roll Hall of Fame
Even though I'll walk in the church and burst in a ball of flames
Only Hall of Fame I'll be inducted in is the alcohol of fame
On the wall of shame
You fags think it's all a game, 'til I walk a flock of flames
Off a plank and, tell me what in the fuck are you thinkin'?
Little gay-lookin' boy
So gay I can barely say it with a straight face, lookin' boy
You're witnessin' a massacre
Like you're watching a church gathering take place, lookin' boy
"Oy vey, that boy's gay!"that's all they say, lookin' boy
You get a thumbs up, pat on the back
And a "way to go" from your label every day, lookin' boy
Hey, lookin' boy! What you say, lookin' boy?
I get a "hell yeah" from Dre, lookin' boy
I'ma work for everything I have, never ask nobody for shit
Get outta my face, lookin' boy!
Basically, boy, you're never gonna be capable
Of keepin' up with the same pace, lookin' boy, 'cause

[Chorus]
I'm beginnin' to feel like a Rap God, Rap God
All my people from the front to the back nod, back nod
The way I'm racin' around the track, call me NASCAR, NASCAR
Dale Earnhardt of the trailer park, the White Trash God
Kneel before General Zod
This planet's Kryptonno, Asgard, Asgard

[Verse 3]
So you'll be Thor and I'll be Odin
You're rodent, I'm omnipotent
Let off, then I'm reloadin'
Immediately with these bombs I'm totin'
And I should not be woken
I'm the walkin' dead, but I'm just a talkin' head, a zombie floatin'
But I got your mom deep-throatin'
I'm out my Ramen Noodle
We have nothin' in common, poodle
I'm a Doberman, pinch yourself in the arm and pay homage, pupil
It's me, my honesty's brutal
But it's honestly futile if I don't utilize what I do though
For good at least once in a while
So I wanna make sure, somewhere in this chicken scratch I scribble and doodle enough rhymes
To maybe try to help get some people through tough times
But I gotta keep a few punchlines
Just in case, 'cause even you unsigned
Rappers are hungry lookin' at me like it's lunchtime
I know there was a time where once I
Was king of the underground
But I still rap like I'm on my Pharoahe Monch grind
So I crunch rhymes, but sometimes when you combine
Appeal with the skin color of mine
You get too big and here they come tryin'
To censor you like that one line
I said on "I'm Back" from The Mathers LP 1 when I
Tried to say I'll take seven kids from Columbine
Put 'em all in a line, add an AK-47, a revolver and a 9
See if I get away with it now that I ain't as big as I was, but I'm
Morphin' into an immortal, comin' through the portal
You're stuck in a time warp from 2004 though
And I don't know what the fuck that you rhyme for
You're pointless as Rapunzel with fuckin' cornrows
You write normal? Fuck being normal!
And I just bought a new Raygun from the future
Just to come and shoot ya, like when Fabolous made Ray J mad
'Cause Fab said he looked like a fag at Mayweather's pad
Singin' to a man while they played piano
Man, oh man, that was a 24/7 special on the cable channel
So Ray J went straight to the radio station
The very next day, "Hey Fab, I'ma kill you!"
Lyrics comin' at you at supersonic speed (J.J. Fad)
Uh, summa-lumma, dooma-lumma, you assumin' I'm a human
What I gotta do to get it through to you? I'm superhuman
Innovative and I'm made of rubber, so that anything you say is ricochetin' off of me and it'll glue to you and
I'm devastating, more than ever demonstrating
How to give a motherfuckin' audience a feeling like it's levitating
Never fading, and I know the haters are forever waiting
For the day that they can say I fell off, they'll be celebrating
'Cause I know the way to get 'em motivated
I make elevating music, you make elevator music
"Oh, he's too mainstream."
Well, that's what they do when they get jealous, they confuse it
"It's not hip-hop, it's pop,"  'cause I found a hella way to fuse it
With rock, shock rap with Doc
Throw on "Lose Yourself" and make 'em lose it
"I don't know how to make songs like that
I don't know what words to use."
Let me know when it occurs to you
While I'm rippin' any one of these verses that versus you
It's curtains, I'm inadvertently hurtin' you
How many verses I gotta murder to
Prove that if you were half as nice
Your songs you could sacrifice virgins to?
Ungh, school flunky, pill junkie
But look at the accolades these skills brung me
Full of myself, but still hungry
I bully myself 'cause I make me do what I put my mind to
And I'm a million leagues above you
Ill when I speak in tongues, but it's still tongue-in-cheek fuck you!
I'm drunkso, Satan, take the fucking wheel
I'ma sleep in the front seat
Bumpin' Heavy D and the Boyz, still "Chunky but Funky"
But in my head there's something I can feel tugging and struggling
Angels fight with devils, and here's what they want from me
They're askin' me to eliminate some of the women hate
But if you take into consideration the bitter hatred
I have, then you may be a little patient
And more sympathetic to the situation
And understand the discrimination
But fuck it, life's handin' you lemons? Make lemonade then!
But if I can't batter the women
How the fuck am I supposed to bake them a cake then?
Don't mistake him for Satan; it's a fatal mistake
If you think I need to be overseas and take a vacation
To trip a broad, and make her fall on her face and
Don't be a retard! Be a king? Think not
Why be a king when you can be a God?


BUSSINESS
Marshall! Sounds like an SOS
Holy wack unlyrical lyrics, Andre, you're fucking right!
To the Rapmobilelet's go!
(Marshall! Marshall!)
Bitches and gentlemen! It's showtime!
Hurry hurry, step right up!
Introducing the star of our show
His name is (Marshall!)
You wouldn't wanna be
Anywhere else in the world right now
So without further ado, I bring to you (Marshall!)

[Verse 1: Eminem]
You're 'bout to witness hip-hop in its most purest
Most rawest form, flow almost flawless
Most hardest, most honest known artist
Chip off the old block, but old Doc is (back)
Looks like Batman brought his own Robin
Oh God, Saddam's got his own Laden
With his own private plane, his own pilot
Set to blow college dorm rooms doors off the hinges
Oranges, peach, pears, plums, syringes
Vrinn, vrinn! Yeah, here I come, I'm inches
Away from you, dear, fear none
Hip-hop is in a state of 9-1-1, so

[Hook: Eminem]
Let's get down to business
I don't got no time to play around, what is this?
Must be a circus in town, let's shut the shit down
On these clowns; can I get a witness? (Hell yeah!)
Let's get down to business
I don't got no time to play around, what is this?
Must be a circus in town, let's shut the shit down
On these clowns; can I get a witness? (Hell yeah!)

[Verse 2: Eminem]
Quick, gotta move fast, gotta perform miracles
Gee willikers Dre, "Holy bat syllables!"
Look at all the bullshit that goes on
In Gotham when I'm gone
Time to get rid of these rap criminals
So skip to your lou while I do what I do best
You ain't even impressed no more, you're used to it
Flow's too wet, nobody close to it
Nobody says it but still everybody knows the shit
The most hated on out of all those who say they get hated on in eighty songs and exaggerate it all so much
They make it all up, there's no such thing
Like a female with good looks who cooks and cleans
It just means so much more to so much more
People when you're rappin' and you know what for
The show must go on; so I'd like to welcome y'all
To Marshall and Andre's carnival, c'mon!

[Hook: Eminem]
Now let's get down to business
I don't got no time to play around, what is this?
Must be a circus in town, let's shut the shit down
On these clowns; can I get a witness? (Hell yeah!)
Let's get down to business
I don't got no time to play around, what is this?
Must be a circus in town, let's shut the shit down
On these clowns; can I get a witness? (Hell yeah!)

[Verse 3: Eminem]
It's just like old times, the Dynamic Duo
Two old friends, why panic? You already know
Who's fully capable, the two caped heroes
Dial straight down the center, eight-zero-zero
You can even call collect, the most feared duet
Since me and Elton played career Russian Roulette
And never even see me blink or get to bustin' a sweat
People steppin' over people just to rush to the set
Just to get to see an MC who breathes so freely
Ease over these beats and be so breezy
Jesus, how can shit be so easy?
How can one Chandra be so Levy?
Turn on these beats, MCs don't see me
Believe me, BET and MTV
Are gonna grieve when we leave, dog, fo' sheezy
Can't leave rap alone, the game needs me
'Til we grow beards, get weird and disappear
Into the mountains, nothin' but clowns down here
But we ain't fuckin' around round here
Yo, Dre (What up?) Can I get a "hell yeah"? (Hell yeah!)

[Hook: Eminem]
Now let's get down to business
I don't got no time to play around, what is this?
Must be a circus in town, let's shut the shit down
On these clowns; can I get a witness? (Hell yeah!)
Let's get down to business
I don't got no time to play around, what is this?
Must be a circus in town, let's shut the shit down
On these clowns; can I get a witness? (Hell yeah!)

[Outro: Eminem]
So there you have it, folks
(Marshall!) has come to save the day
Back with his friend Andre
And to remind you that bullshit does not pay
Because (Marshall!) and Andre are here to stay
And never go away, until our dying day
Until we're old and grey (Marshall!)
So until next time, friends
Same blonde hair, same rap channel
Good night, everyone! Thank you for coming!
Your host for the evening (Marshall!)
Oh! Heh



LOOSE YOURSELF
[Intro]
Look, if you had one shot, or one opportunity
To seize everything you ever wanted, in one moment
Would you capture it, or just let it slip?

[Verse 1]
Yo! His palms are sweaty, knees weak, arms are heavy
There's vomit on his sweater already: Mom's spaghetti
He's nervous, but on the surface he looks calm and ready
To drop bombs, but he keeps on forgetting
What he wrote down, the whole crowd goes so loud
He opens his mouth, but the words won't come out
He's choking, how? Everybody's joking now
The clock's run out, time's up, overblaow!
Snap back to reality, ope there goes gravity, ope
There goes Rabbit, he choked, he's so mad but he won't
Give up that easy, no, he won't have it, he knows
His whole back's to these ropes, it don't matter, he's dope
He knows that but he's broke, he's so stagnant, he knows
When he goes back to this mobile home, that's when it's
Back to the lab again yo, this whole rhapsody
Better go capture this moment and hope it don't pass him

[Chorus]
You better lose yourself in the music
The moment, you own it, you better never let it go
You only get one shot, do not miss your chance to blow
This opportunity comes once in a lifetime, yo
You better lose yourself in the music
The moment, you own it, you better never let it go
You only get one shot, do not miss your chance to blow
This opportunity comes once in a lifetime, yo
You better

[Verse 2]
His soul's escaping through this hole that is gaping
This world is mine for the taking, make me king
As we move toward a New World Order
A normal life is boring; but superstardom's
Close to post-mortem, it only grows harder
Homie grows hotter, he blows, it's all over
These hoes is all on him, coast-to-coast shows
He's known as the Globetrotter, lonely roads
God only knows, he's grown farther from home, he's no father
He goes home and barely knows his own daughter
But hold your nose, 'cause here goes the cold water
These hoes don't want him no mo', he's cold product
They moved on to the next schmoe who flows
He nose-dove and sold nada, and so the soap opera
Is told, it unfolds, I suppose it's old, partner
But the beat goes on: da-da-dom, da-dom, dah-dah, dah-dah

[Chorus]
You better lose yourself in the music
The moment, you own it, you better never let it go
You only get one shot, do not miss your chance to blow
This opportunity comes once in a lifetime, yo
You better lose yourself in the music
The moment, you own it, you better never let it go
You only get one shot, do not miss your chance to blow
This opportunity comes once in a lifetime, yo
You better

[Verse 3]
No more games, I'ma change what you call rage
Tear this motherfuckin' roof off like two dogs caged
I was playin' in the beginning, the mood all changed
I've been chewed up and spit out and booed off stage
But I kept rhymin' and stepped right in the next cypher
Best believe somebody's payin' the Pied Piper
All the pain inside amplified by the
Fact that I can't get by with my nine-to-
Five and I can't provide the right type of life for my family
'Cause man, these goddamn food stamps don't buy diapers
And there's no movie, there's no Mekhi Phifer, this is my life
And these times are so hard, and it's gettin' even harder
Tryna feed and water my seed, plus teeter-totter
Caught up between bein' a father and a prima donna
Baby mama drama, screamin' on her, too much for me to wanna
Stay in one spot, another day of monotony's
Gotten me to the point I'm like a snail, I've got
To formulate a plot or end up in jail or shot
Success is my only motherfuckin' optionfailure's not
Mom, I love you, but this trailer's got
To go; I cannot grow old in Salem's Lot
So here I go, it's my shot: feet, fail me not
This may be the only opportunity that I got

[Chorus]
You better lose yourself in the music
The moment, you own it, you better never let it go
You only get one shot, do not miss your chance to blow
This opportunity comes once in a lifetime, yo
You better lose yourself in the music
The moment, you own it, you better never let it go
You only get one shot, do not miss your chance to blow
This opportunity comes once in a lifetime, yo
You better

[Outro]
You can do anything you set your mind to, man


TILL I COLLAPSE
[Intro: Eminem]
'Cause sometimes you just feel tired, feel weak (Yo left, yo left, yo left, right, left)
And when you feel weak (Yo left)
You feel like you wanna just give up (Yo left, yo left)
But you gotta search within you (Right, left)
Tryna find that inner strength (Yo left, yo left)
And just pull that shit out of you (Yo left)
And get that motivation to not give up (Right, left, yo left)
And not be a quitter, no matter how bad you wanna just fall (Yo left, yo left)
Flat on your face and collapse (Right, left)

[Verse 1: Eminem]
'Til I collapse I'm spillin' these raps long as you feel 'em
'Til the day that I drop you'll never say that I'm not killin' 'em
Cause when I am not, then I'ma stop pennin' 'em
And I am not hip-hop and I'm just not Eminem
Subliminal thoughts, when I'ma stop sendin' 'em?
Women are caught in webs, spin 'em and hock venom
Adrenaline shots of penicillin could not get the illin' to stop
Amoxicillin's just not real enough
The criminal, cop-killin', hip-hop villain
A minimal swap to cop millions of Pac listeners
You're comin' with me, feel it or not
You're gonna fear it like I showed you the spirit of God lives in us
You hear it a lot, lyrics to shock
Is it a miracle or am I just product of pop fizzin' up?
Fa shizzel, my wizzel, this is the plot, listen up
You bizzels forgot, Slizzel does not give a fuck

[Chorus: Nate Dogg]
'Til the roof comes off, 'til the lights go out
'Til my legs give out, can't shut my mouth
'Til the smoke clears out, am I high? Perhaps
I'ma rip this shit 'til my bones collapse
(Until the roof) 'Til the roof comes off, 'til the lights go out
(The roof comes off) 'Til my legs give out, can't shut my mouth
(Until my legs) 'Til the smoke clears out, am I high? Perhaps
(Give out from underneath me) I'ma rip this shit 'til my bones collapse

[Verse 2: Eminem]
Music is like magic, there's a certain feelin' you get
When you real and you spit, and people are feelin' your shit
This is your moment, and every single minute you spend
Tryna hold on to it 'cause you may never get it again
So while you're in it, try to get as much shit as you can
And when your run is over, just admit when it's at its end
'Cause I'm at the end of my wits with half the shit that gets in
I got a list, here's the order of my list that it's in
It goes Reggie, Jay-Z, 2Pac and Biggie
Andr from OutKast, Jada, Kurupt, Nas, and then me
But in this industry I'm the cause of a lot of envy
So when I'm not put on this list, the shit does not offend me
That's why you see me walk around like nothing's botherin' me
Even though half you people got a fuckin' problem with me
You hate it, but you know respect you got to give me
The press's wet dream, like Bobby and Whitney  Nate, hit me!

[Chorus: Nate Dogg]
'Til the roof comes off, 'til the lights go out
'Til my legs give out, can't shut my mouth
'Til the smoke clears out, am I high? Perhaps
I'ma rip this shit 'til my bones collapse
(Until the roof) 'Til the roof comes off, 'til the lights go out
(The roof comes off) 'Til my legs give out, can't shut my mouth
(Until my legs) 'Til the smoke clears out, am I high? Perhaps
(Give out from underneath me) I'ma rip this shit 'til my bones collapse

[Verse 3: Eminem]
Soon as a verse starts, I eat at an MC's heart
What is he thinking? How not to go against me, smart
And it's absurd how people hang on every word
I'll probably never get the props I feel I ever deserve
But I'll never be served, my spot is forever reserved
If I ever leave Earth, that would be the death of me first
Cause in my heart of hearts I know nothin' could ever be worse
That's why I'm clever when I put together every verse
My thoughts are sporadic, I act like I'm an addict
I rap like I'm addicted to smack like I'm Kim Mathers
But I don't wanna go forth and back in constant battles
The fact is I would rather sit back and bomb some rappers
So this is like a full-blown attack I'm launchin' at 'em
The track is on some battlin' raps, who wants some static?
Cause I don't really think that the fact that I'm Slim matters
A plaque and platinum status is whack if I'm not the baddest, so

[Chorus: Nate Dogg]
'Til the roof comes off, 'til the lights go out
'Til my legs give out, can't shut my mouth
'Til the smoke clears out, am I high? Perhaps
I'ma rip this shit 'til my bones collapse
(Until the roof) 'Til the roof comes off, 'til the lights go out
(The roof comes off) 'Til my legs give out, can't shut my mouth
(Until my legs) 'Til the smoke clears out, am I high? Perhaps
(Give out from underneath me) I'ma rip this shit 'til my bones collapse

[Outro: Eminem & Nate Dogg]
Until the roof (until the roof)
The roof comes off (the roof comes off)
Until my legs (until my legs)
Give out from (underneath me)
I will not fall, I will stand tall
Feels like no one can beat me



VENOM
I got a song filled with shit for the strong-willed
When the world gives you a raw deal
Sets you off 'til you scream, "Piss off! Screw you!"
When it talks to you like you don't belong
Or tells you you're in the wrong field
When something's in your mitochondrial
'Cause it latched on to you, like

[Verse 1]
Knock knock, let the devil in
Manevolent as I've ever been, head is spinnin'
This medicine's screamin', "L-L-L-Let us in!"
L-L-L-Like a salad bowl, Edgar Allan Poe
Bedridden, shoulda been dead a long time ago
Liquid Tylenol, gelatins, think my skeleton's meltin'
Wicked, I get all high when I think I've smelled the scent
Of elephant manurehell, I meant Kahla
Screw it, to hell with it, I went through hell with accelerants
And blew up my-my-myself again
Volkswagen, tailspin, bucket matches my pale skin
Mayo and went from Hellmann's and being rail thin
Filet-o-Fish, Scribble Jam, Rap Olympics '97 Freaknik
How can I be down? Me and Bizarre in Florida
Proof's room slept on the floor of 'da motel then
Dr. Dre said, "Hell yeah!"
And I got his stamp like a postcard, word to Mel-Man
And I know they're gonna hate
But I don't care, I barely can wait
To hit 'em with the snare and the bass
Square in the face, this fuckin' world better prepare to get laced
Because they're gonna taste my

[Chorus]
Venom, (I got that) adrenaline momentum
And I'm not knowin' when I'm
Ever gonna slow up and I'm
Ready to snap any moment I'm
Thinkin' it's time to go get 'em
They ain't gonna know what hit 'em
(W-W-When they get bit with the)
Venom, (I got that) adrenaline momentum
And I'm not knowin' when I'm
Ever gonna slow up and I'm
Ready to snap any moment I'm
Thinkin' it's time to go get 'em
They ain't gonna know what hit 'em
(W-W-When they get bit with the)

[Verse 2]
I said knock knock, let the devil in
Shotgun p-p-pellets in the felt pen
Cocked, fuck around and catch a hot one
It-it's evident I'm not done
V-Venomous, the thoughts spun
Like a web and you just caught in 'em
Held against your will like a hubcap or mud flap
Beat strangler attack
So this ain't gonna feel like a love tap
Eat painkiller pills, fuck up the track
Like, what's her name's at the wheel? Danica Patrick
Threw the car into reverse at the Indy, a nut crashin'
Into ya, the back of it just mangled steel
My Mustang and the Jeep Wrangler grill
With the front smashed, much as my rear fender, assassin
Slim be a combination of an actual kamikaze and Gandhi (Gandhi)
Translation, I will probably kill us both
When I end up backin' into ya
You ain't gonna be able to tell what the fuck's happenin' to ya
When you're bit with the

[Chorus]
Venom, adrenaline momentum
And I'm not knowin' when I'm
Ever gonna slow up and I'm
Ready to snap any moment I'm
Thinkin' it's time to go get 'em
They ain't gonna know what hit 'em
(W-W-When they get bit with the)
Venom, (I got that) adrenaline momentum
And I'm not knowin' when I'm
Ever gonna slow up and I'm
Ready to snap any moment I'm
Thinkin' it's time to go get 'em
They ain't gonna know what hit 'em
(W-W-When they get bit with the)

[Verse 3]
I said knock knock, let the devil in
Alien, E-E-Elliott phone home
Ain't no telling when this chokehold
On this game will end, I'm loco
Became a Symbiote, so
My fangs are in your throat, ho
You're snake-bitten with myvenom
With the ballpoint pen I'm
Gun cocked, bump stock, double-aught, buckshot
Tire thumper, a garrote, tie a couple knots
Fired up and caught fire, juggernaut
Punk rock, bitch, it's goin' down like Yung Joc
'Cause the Doc put me on like sunblock
Why the fuck not, you only get one shot
Ate shit 'til I can't taste it
Chased it with straight liquor
Then paint thinner, then drank 'til I faint
And awake with a headache
And I take anything in rectangular shape
Then I wait to face the demons I'm bonded to
'Cause they're chasin' me but I'm part of you
So escapin' me is impossible
I latch onto you like aparasite
And I probably ruined your parents' life
And your childhood too
'Cause if I'm the music that y'all grew up on
I'm responsible for you retarded fools
I'm the super villain Dad and Mom was losin' their marbles to
You marvel that? Eddie Brock is you
And I'm the suit, so call me

[Chorus]
Venom, (I got that) adrenaline momentum
And I'm not knowin' when I'm
Ever gonna slow up and I'm
Ready to snap any moment I'm
Thinkin' it's time to go get 'em
They ain't gonna know what hit 'em
(W-W-When they get bit with the)
Venom, (I got that) adrenaline momentum
And I'm not knowin' when I'm
Ever gonna slow up and I'm
Ready to snap any moment I'm
Thinkin' it's time to go get 'em
They ain't gonna know what hit 'em
(W-W-When they get bit with the)



NOT AFRAID
[Chorus]
Im not afraid (Im not afraid)
To take a stand (To take a stand)
Everybody (Everybody)
Come take my hand (Come take my hand)
Well walk this road together, through the storm
Whatever weather, cold or warm
Just lettin' you know that youre not alone
Holla if you feel like youve been down the same road

[Intro]
Yeah, it's been a ride
I guess I had to go to that place to get to this one
Now some of you might still be in that place
If you're tryin' to get out, just follow me
I'll get you there

[Verse 1]
You can try and read my lyrics off of this paper before I lay 'em
But you won't take the sting out these words before I say 'em
'Cause ain't no way I'ma let you stop me from causin' mayhem
When I say I'ma do somethin', I do it
I don't give a damn what you think, I'm doin' this for me
So fuck the world, feed it beans
It's gassed up if it thinks it's stoppin' me
I'ma be what I set out to be, without a doubt, undoubtably
And all those who look down on me
I'm tearin' down your balcony
No ifs, ands or buts, don't try to ask him why or how can he
From Infinite down to the last Relapse album he's still shittin'
Whether he's on salary, paid hourly
Until he bows out or he shits his bowels out of him
Whichever comes first, for better or worse
He's married to the game, like a "fuck you" for Christmas
His gift is a curse
Forget the Earth, he's got the urge to pull his dick from the dirt
And fuck the whole universe

[Chorus]
Im not afraid (Im not afraid)
To take a stand (To take a stand)
Everybody (Everybody)
Come take my hand (Come take my hand)
Well walk this road together, through the storm
Whatever weather, cold or warm
Just lettin' you know that youre not alone
Holla if you feel like youve been down the same road

[Verse 2]
Okay, quit playin' with the scissors and shit, and cut the crap
I shouldn't have to rhyme these words in a rhythm
For you to know it's a rap
You said you was king, you lied through your teeth
For that, fuck your feelings
Instead of gettin' crowned, you're gettin' capped
And to the fans, I'll never let you down again, I'm back
I promise to never go back on that promise
In fact, let's be honest, that last Relapse CD wasehh
Perhaps I ran them accents into the ground
Relax, I ain't goin' back to that now
All I'm tryin' to say is get back, click-clack-blaow
'Cause I ain't playin' around
There's a game called circle and I don't know how
I'm way too up to back down
But I think I'm still tryin' to figure this crap out
Thought I had it mapped out, but I guess I didn't
This fuckin' black cloud still follows me around
But it's time to exorcise these demons
These muh'fuckers are doin' jumpin' jacks now

[Chorus]
Im not afraid (Im not afraid)
To take a stand (To take a stand)
Everybody (Everybody)
Come take my hand (Come take my hand)
Well walk this road together, through the storm
Whatever weather, cold or warm
Just lettin' you know that youre not alone
Holla if you feel like youve been down the same road

[Bridge]
And I just cant keep livin' this way
So startin' today
Im breakin' out of this cage
Im standin' up, I'ma face my demons
Im mannin' up, I'ma hold my ground
Ive had enough, now Im so fed up
Time to put my life back together right now

[Verse 3]
It was my decision to get clean, I did it for me
Admittedly I probably did it subliminally for you
So I could come back a brand-new me
You helped see me through
And don't even realize what you did, believe me you
I've been through the wringer
But they can do little to the middle finger
I think I got a tear in my eye, I feel like the king of
My world, haters can make like bees with no stingers
And drop dead: no more beef lingers
No more drama from now on, I promise
To focus solely on handlin' my responsibilities as a father
So I solemnly swear to always treat this roof like my daughters
And raise it, you couldn't lift a single shingle on it
Cause the way I feel, I'm strong enough to go to the club
Or the corner pub and lift the whole liquor counter up
Cause I'm raisin' the bar
I'd shoot for the moon, but I'm too busy gazin' at stars
I feel amazin', and I'm

[Chorus]
Im not afraid (Im not afraid)
To take a stand (To take a stand)
Everybody (Everybody)
Come take my hand (Come take my hand)
Well walk this road together, through the storm
Whatever weather, cold or warm
Just lettin' you know that youre not alone
Holla if you feel like youve been down the same road



KAMIKAZE
Okay, how do I say this? (Fack, fack, fack)
Last year didn't work out so well for me
(Fack, fack, fack) (Fack last year!)
(Last year can eat a dick!)
2018, well (Fack, fack)

[Verse 1]
Yeah, I'm a fuckin' kamikaze crashin' into everything
You beat me, Islamic Nazi, that means there is no such thing
I've been goin' for your jugular since Craig G "Duck Alert"
Wedgie in my underwear, the whole bed sheet and the comforter
Stuck up in my rectal crack, kiss my disrespectful ass
I'll ride through your cul-de-sac
Window cracked, bumpin' your reference tracks
Y-You collaborative effort rap, I-I have never said his raps
O-Overstayed my welcome, stepped in crap
And ruined your welcome mat
So spit that shit from the heart, you didn't write like you wrote it (wrote it) (yeah)
While I teabag the microphone 'cause I go nuts on it (on it) (yeah)
Like a fighter jet lined with explosives that'll strike any moment
Headed right at opponents and I'm the fuckin' pilot that flown it
I'm 'bout to

[Chorus]
Smash into everyone, crash into everything
Back and I've just begun, "FACK" 2017
Fack, fack on everyone
Fack, fack on everyone
Fack, fack on everyone
I'm a Kamikaze, gonna
Smash into everyone, crash like an F-15
Damage already done, y'all shoulda let me be
Fack, fack on everyone
Fack, fack on everyone
Fack, fack on everyone
I'm a Kamikaze, gonna

[Verse 2]
I turned to rap 'cause it made me feel tough when I wasn't (wasn't)
From the moment I heard rappers cussin', I was in (was in)
Which is why I identify with the guy
Who I was invented by, Dre's Frankenstein
Energized like a nine volt
Ice cold like Snake Eyes, twice in a row on a dice roll
But if the only reason I blowed is 'cause I'm white though
Why don't every other white rapper sell what I sold? (ooh)
Kamikaze pilot, I wrote my suicide note
Here come the guys in white coats tryin' to stop me
'Fore I jump behind the controls and try to fly into foes
'Cause I'm takin' y'all with me when I go cyclone
I don't think this typhoon's lettin' up any time soon, here I go
Eyes closed, blindfolded, I'm 'bout to

[Chorus]
Smash into everyone, crash into everything
Back and I've just begun, "FACK" 2017
Fack, fack on everyone
Fack, fack on everyone
Fack, fack on everyone
I'm a Kamikaze, gonna
Smash into everyone, crash like an F-15
Damage already done, y'all should've let me be
Fack, fack on everyone
Fack, fack on everyone
Fack, fack on everyone
I'm a Kamikaze, gonna

[Bridge]
Smash
Kamikaze, kamikaze
Kami, kami-kamikaze, kamikaze, kami-kamikaze (kamikaze)
Take a look at what I've done

[Verse 3]
I heard your freestyle on Shade 45, that shit was embarrassing
There is no way we ever air that shit again, I guarantee that
Wait, that shit was so ass it's somethin' we wouldn't dare re-air it
The shit's embarrassing as me rear-ending Tara Reid bare
In my therapy chair, my dick is the hair length of Cher
Each nut is the chair width of an Acorn stairlift, beware of me
Lyrically I'm terrible, better get your lyrics prepared
Richard Ramirez is here, serial killin' every beat there is
Wait, wait, got the eeriest feelin'
Somethin' evil is lurkin', I'm no conspiracy theorist
But somethin' here is afootoh yeah, it's my dick
Get the measurin' stick (what?), twelve inches of wood
Wait, but I've been goin' for your jugular since Craig G "Duck Alert"
And I've come to pay respects
'Cause if you sleep you're fuckedother words
You get laid to rest and I hope your butt is hurt
Put me on a track, I go cray on it like a color book
You got some views, but you're still below me
Mine are higher, so when you compare our views, you get overlooked
And I don't say the hook unless I wrote the hook
And now I'm just freestylin' in the vocal booth
And you know I've always spoke the truth
You're lyin' through your teeth so much you broke a tooth
And it ain't somethin' I need a phone to do
When I say I can't wait 'til I get ahold of you
And I don't know what I'm s'posed to do
Line up the rappers, take my pic like a photo shoot

MOCKINGBIRD
Yeah, I know sometimes things may not always make sense to you right now. But hey, what'd Daddy always tell you? Straighten up, little soldier, stiffen up that upper lip! What you cryin' about? You got me

[Verse 1]
Hailie, I know you miss your mom, and I know you miss your dad
When I'm gone, but I'm tryin' to give you the life that I never had
I can see you're sad, even when you smile, even when you laugh
I can see it in your eyes, deep inside you wanna cry
'Cause you're scared, I ain't there
Daddy's with you in your prayers
No more cryin', wipe them tears
Daddy's here, no more nightmares
We gon' pull together through it
We gon' do it, LainieUncle's crazy, ain't he?
Yeah, but he loves you, girl, and you better know it
We're all we got in this world, when it spins, when it swirls
When it whirls, when it twirls, two little beautiful girls
Lookin' puzzled, in a daze, I know it's confusin' you
Daddy's always on the move, Momma's always on the news
I try to keep you sheltered from it, but somehow it seems
The harder that I try to do that, the more it backfires on me
All the things growin' up as Daddy that he had to see
Daddy don't want you to see, but you see just as much as he did
We did not plan it to be this way, your mother and me
But things have got so bad between us, I don't see us ever bein'
Together ever again, like we used to be when we was teenagers
But then, of course, everything always happens for a reason
I guess it was never meant to be, but it's just something
We have no control over, and that's what destiny is
But no more worries, rest your head and go to sleep
Maybe one day we'll wake up and this'll all just be a dream

[Hook]
Now hush, little baby, don't you cry
Everything's gonna be alright
Stiffen that upper lip up, little lady, I told ya
Daddy's here to hold ya through the night
I know Mommy's not here right now, and we don't know why
We fear how we feel inside
It may seem a little crazy, pretty baby
But I promise, Momma's gon' be alright (heh)

[Verse 2]
It's funny, I remember back one year when Daddy had no money
Mommy wrapped the Christmas presents up and stuck 'em under the tree
And said some of 'em were from me 'cause Daddy couldn't buy 'em
I'll never forget that Christmas, I sat up the whole night cryin'
'Cause Daddy felt like a bumsee, Daddy had a job
But his job was to keep the food on the table for you and Mom
And at the time, every house that we lived in
Either kept gettin' broken into and robbed or shot up on the block
And your mom was savin' money for you in a jar
Tryin' to start a piggy bank for you so you could go to college
Almost had a thousand dollars, 'til someone broke in and stole it
And I know it hurt so bad it broke your momma's heart
And it seemed like everything was just startin' to fall apart
Mom and Dad was arguin' a lot, so Momma moved back
On to Chalmers in the flat, one bedroom apartment
And Dad moved back to the other side of 8 Mile on Novara
And that's when Daddy went to California with his CD
And met Dr. Dre and flew you and Momma out to see me
But Daddy had to work, you and Momma had to leave me
Then you started seein' Daddy on the TV, and Momma didn't like it
And you and Lainie were too young to understand it
Papa was a rolling stone, Momma developed a habit
And it all happened too fast for either one of us to grab it
I'm just sorry you were there and had to witness it first hand
'Cause all I ever wanted to do was just make you proud
Now I'm sittin' in this empty house
Just reminiscin', lookin' at your baby pictures, it just trips me out
To see how much you both have grown, it's almost like you're sisters now
Wow, guess you pretty much are, and Daddy's still here
Lainie, I'm talkin' to you too, Daddy's still here
I like the sound of that, yeah, it's got a ring to it, don't it?
Sshh! Momma's only gone for the moment

[Hook]
Now hush, little baby, don't you cry
Everything's gonna be alright
Stiffen that upper lip up, little lady, I told ya
Daddy's here to hold ya through the night
I know Mommy's not here right now, and we don't know why
We fear how we feel inside
It may seem a little crazy, pretty baby
But I promise, Momma's gon' be alright

[Hook 2]
And if you ask me to, Daddy's gonna buy you a mockingbird
I'ma give you the world
I'ma buy a diamond ring for you, I'ma sing for you
I'll do anything for you to see you smile
And if that mockingbird don't sing and that ring don't shine
I'ma break that birdie's neck
I'll go back to the jeweler who sold it to ya
And make him eat every carat, don't fuck with Dad! (Ha-ha!)




STFU
[Chorus]
Shut the fuck up
You're a fucking cunt
Shut the fuck up
You're a stupid cunt, suck my dick
Shut the fuck up
Stop being a fucking cunt
Shut the fuck up
Nobody even wants you here

[Instrumental]

[Verse 1]
I just wanna let you know, you're a stupid fucking cunt
Go ahead and run your mouth, pussy, I don't give a fuck
You're a stupid piece of shit, you're a stupid fucking bitch
Get the fuck up off my dick, get the fuck up off my dick, like
Please end your fucking life, please end your fucking life
I really gotta emphasize, no one cares if you're alive
You're a fucking penis-hole, grab a dick and eat it whole
I need to know if you were dropped when you were just a fetus though
You're so fucking ugly and your face is fucking foul, jeez
You're so fucking loud, can you shut your fucking mouth, can you

[Chorus]
Shut the fuck up
You're a fucking cunt
Shut the fuck up
You're a stupid cunt, suck my dick
Shut the fuck up
Stop being a fucking cunt
Shut the fuck up
Nobody even wants you here, yo

[Verse 2]
Close your fucking mouth, you're just really fucking dense
If you hate me, why you talking?
You don't make no fucking sense
Got a sad life, sad life, go to fucking hell
Are you stupid or disabled? Man, I can't fucking tell (meh)
You're a fucking dumb shit
You don't even run shit
Get the fuck up out of my face and go to hell and eat a dick
Come and catch these hands, boy
Come and match these bands, boy
I'm not crazy, I just do it all because I can, boy
I hope you fucking die in a high-speed car crash
I hope you fucking fall head-first and get your neck cracked
I hope you have some beautiful children that die from cancer
I hope you catch Zika when your wife gets pregnant
I hope you win the lottery and die the next day
And your daughter has to see you getting lowered in your grave

[Outro]
(Like, ooh, uh-that was a little dark)
(I'm sorry)
(Tha-that was a little dark)
(Very poor taste)
Shut the fuck up
(I shouldn't have said that)
You're a fucking cunt
(Actually, no, I should've)
Shut the fuck up
(Actually, I didn't say enough)
You're a stupid cunt, suck my dick
Shut the fuck up
Stop being a fucking cunt
Shut the fuck up
Nobody even wants you here




HOOD RICH
[Intro: Pink Guy]
Yeah
Yeah
Y'all know what it is
Yeah
You know what the fuck it is
Yeah

[Verse 1: Pink Guy]
I just fucked a bitch with another bitch
Put a knife to her throat and I took her shit, ya ya
Motherfuckers wanna get lit with the pink
But I tell her gotta let me put the finger in the stink yeah
I'm all about the zinc and the copper
I only do feds, no coppers
Labels trying to hit me with the "Go go"
I'mma have to say "No no"
I'mma have to hit them with the low blow, ya ya
Money on the phone but I'm broke
I only take bars and the ganj, no dope
I just love pussy, not the girl that it's attached to
Shit smell like tuna and the cat food
I don't even want to see her face just give me dome
Oh my lord, I'mma have to run like Google Chrome
Why you always got to say that mean shit?
'Cause I'm a pink cunt, it don't mean shit

[Interlude: Getter]
Man, Pink guy's a little bitch, mane
Just kidding

[Verse 2: Getter]
(Ay, ay, ay, ay)
It's motherfucking Getter bitch, Yaddadamean
I'm the fucking human green screen with the fat peeny peen
Never wrapped my willy but I let her
Chase my dick down have her eat it with some pepper
I said fuck school and I dipped quick 'cause they fucked my shit
Caught me sucking dicks in the bathroom with a bitch
But detention was lit, oh shit
Remember Miss Baker with the fat ass tits?
And the fat ass lips, with the banging ass hips
Make her grab you by the dick, rip her clit in two
Make her wonder why she didn't pass you
By putting your piece in the poop shoot, dude, just kidding
I'm just an EDM dude on cam with the Pink Man and Colletti
Shooting dude confetti, only skinny Betties
Now I'm looking for the truant in an Audi, now I'm dead, G (AHH)

[Verse 3: Nick Colletti]
Viner of the month
Always smoking blunts
Always on Twitter
If she bad she know I'm fucking with her
I'm from the 'Burgh, I'm in Cali though
Got kush coke cunt in my bungalow
Don't dress myself, had your bitch do it
Don't stress too much, ain't a thing to it
Yo I'm 22 and I'm hood rich
Date a church girl, she a good bitch
She a psych major, that's good head
When she bring her friend I fuck her friend instead
I'm in Malibu eating rich cunt
Fuck bongs, bro, we smoke big blunts
And that's all day and we cashing out
Aye, aye, aye

[Outro]
You don't know shit about Pink Guy
You don't know shit about Getter
You don't know shit about Nick Colletti
Get off Vine
Get off Twitter
Get off YouTube
You stupid bitch
You stupid fucking bitch
Goddammit




FRIED RICE
[Verse]
Fried rice, fri-fri-fried rice bitch
You wanna play your cards with God and roll the dice, bitch
Weeding out the weak with agriculture education
Oh, you got me eating seeds and I ain't talking bout fellatio
I'm crazy, yo, got that technique stir fry chopstick asian flow
I ain't about the oven or the microwave grills
But I know a little bit about the culinary skills
Required, if you wanna roll with the frying pan
Gotta fry with the heart of a China man
Anybody got another method in the pantry can suck my dick
This shit tastes like vagina man
Now I ain't no Gordon Ramsay, but I make the best damn rice you pansies
A bitch like me came from Japan, see
Coin slot eyes gonna drop the panties
If you want a piece of this get in line, you piece of shit
They just keep coming back for more you'd think Jehovah's Witnesses
They call me the grain man, ancient ritual praying can
Help cook rice on a spiritual level for those willing and able to be the king of the table, heh
Have some of my grain and I ain't talking about the fucking headaches you get on the morning after Fridays
I throw this rice like bridesmaids




LECTURE
This page provides information about online lectures and lecture slides for use in teaching and learning from the book Computer Science: An Interdisciplinary Approach. These lectures are appropriate for use by instructors as the basis for a flipped class on the subject, or for self-study by individuals.

Flipped classroom. If you are an an instructor teaching introductory computer science, an effective way for you to teach the material in a typical college class is to adhere to a weekly cadence, as follows:

    Each week, send an email to all students in the class that briefly describes activities for that week (lectures, reading, and programming assignments drawn from the book or from this booksite).
    Students watch the lecture videos at their own pace, do the readings, and work on the programming assignments.
    Schedule a weekly class meeting for discussion of the material, reviews for exams, informal interaction with students, and any enrichment material you may wish to cover. 

This is just one suggestionthis material can support many different teaching styles and formats.

Important note: A common mistake in teaching a flipped class is to add too much enrichment material. Our experience is that time in class meetings is much better spent preparing students for success on programming assignments and exams. If an instructor makes it clear that the best way to prepare for exams is to watch the lecture videos and do the reading, most students will do so. Class meetings then can involve interacting with students and with the material in such a way as to reinforce understanding. For example, working with potential exam questions is an excellent activity.

Self-study. An effective way to learn the material on your own is to watch the lecture videos on some regular schedule, do the associated reading, and attempt to solve some of the exercises in the book or on the booksite on your own. If you get stuck on a particular exercise, find some others or try to solve some of the problems given in the lectures without looking at the solutions there.

Available lectures. The lecture videos are available for purchase through Pearson. When watching a lecture video, it is very important to choose an appropriate speed. If it is too slow, you are likely to be bored; if it is too fast, you are likely to get lost. Also be sure to make liberal use of pause and rewind.

The slides used in the lectures are available in .pdf format by clicking the links in the lecture titles below.

    Lecture 0: PrologueA Simple Machine. This lecture introduces fundamental ideas of computation in the context of a familiar and important application from the field of cryptography. The story motivates the study of computer science, but the concepts covered are a bit advanced, so novices may wish to review it again after watching the other lectures in the course.

    Lecture 1: Basics. Why program? This lecture addresses that basic question. Then it describes the anatomy of your first program and the process of developing a program in Java using either virtual terminals or a program development environment, with some historical context. Most of the lecture is devoted to a thorough coverage of Java's built-in data types, with example programs for each.

    Lecture 2: Conditionals and Loops. The if, while, and for statements are Java's fundamental control structures. This lecture is built around short programs that use these constructs to address important computational tasks. Examples include sorting, computing the square root, factoring, and simulating a random process. The lecture concludes with a detailed example illustrating the process of debugging a program.

    Lecture 3: Arrays. Computing with a large sequence of values of the same type is extremely common. This lecture describes Java's built-in array data structure that supports such applications, with several examples, including shuffling a deck of cards, the coupon collector test for randomness, and random walks in a grid.

    Lecture 4: Input and Output. To interact with our programs, we need mechanisms for taking information from the outside world and for presenting information to the outside world. This lecture describes several such mechanisms: for text, drawings, and animation. Detailed examples covered include fractal drawings that model natural phenomena and an animation of a ball bouncing around in the display window.

    Lecture 5: Functions and Libraries. Modular programming is the art and science of breaking a program into pieces that can be individually developed. This lecture introduces functions (Java methods), a fundamental mechanism that enables modular programming. Motivating examples include functions for the classic Gaussian distribution and an application that creates digital music.

    Lecture 6: Recursion. A recursive function is one that calls itself. This lecture introduces the concept by treating in detail the ruler function and (related) classic examples, including the Towers of Hanoi puzzle, the H-tree, and simple models of the real world based on recursion. We show a common pitfall in the use of recursion, and a simple way to avoid it, which introduces a different (related) programming paradigm known as dynamic programming.

    Lecture 7: Performance. When you develop a program, you need to be aware of its resource requirements. In this lecture, we describe a scientific approach to understanding performance, where we develop mathematical models describing the running time our programs and then run empirical tests to validate them. Eventually we come to a simple and effective approach that you can use to predict the running time of your own programs that involve significant amounts of computation.

    Lecture 8: Abstract Data Types. In Java, you can create your own data types and use them in your programs. In this and the next lecture, we show how this ability allows us to view our programs as abstract representations of real-world concepts. First we show the mechanics of writing client programs that use data types. Our examples involve abstractions such as color, images, and genes. This style of programming is known as object-oriented programming because our programs manipulate objects, which hold data type values.

    Lecture 9: Creating Data Types. Creating your own data types is the central activity in modern Java programming. This lecture covers the mechanics (instance variables, constructors, instance methods, and test clients) and then develops several examples, culminating in a program that uses a quintessential mathematical abstraction (complex numbers) to create visual representations of the famous Mandelbrot set.

    Lecture 10: Programming Languages. We conclude the course with an overview of important issues surrounding programming languages. To convince you that your knowledge of Java will enable you to learn other programming languages, we show implementations of a typical program in C, C++, Python, and Matlab. We describe important differences among these languages and address fundamental issues, such as garbage collection, type checking, object oriented programming, and functional programming with some brief historical context.

    Lecture 11: Searching and Sorting. Building on the scientific approach developed in Lecture 7, we introduce and study classic algorithms for two fundamental problems, in the context of realistic applications. Our message is that efficient algorithms (binary search and mergesort, in this case) are a key ingredient in addressing computational problems with scalable solutions that can handle huge instances.

    Lecture 12: Stacks and Queues. Our introduction to data structures is a careful look at the fundamental stack and queue abstractions, including performance specifications. Then we introduce the concept of linked structures and focus on their utility in developing simple, safe, clear, and efficient implementations of stacks and queues.

    Lecture 13: Symbol Tables. The symbol table abstraction is one of the most important and useful programmer's tools, s we illustrate with several examples in this lecture. Extending the scientific approach of the previous two lectures, we introduce and study binary search trees, a classic data structure that supports efficient implementations of this abstraction.

    Lecture 14: Introduction to Theory of Computation. The theory of computation helps us address fundamental questions about the nature of computation while at the same time helping us better understand the ways in which we interact with the computer. In this lecture, we introduce formal languages and abstract machines, focusing on simple models that are actually widely useful in practical applications.

    Lecture 15: Turing Machines. In 1936, Alan Turing published a paper that is widely hailed as one of the most important scientific papers of the 20th century. This lecture is devoted to the two far-reaching central ideas of the paper: All computational devices have equivalent computational power, and there are limitations to that power.

    Lecture 16: Intractability. As computer applications expanded, computer scientists and mathematicians realized that a refinement of Turing's ideas is needed. Which computational problems can we solve with the resource limitations that are inescapable in the real world? As described in this lecture, this question, fundamentally, remains unanswered.

    Lecture 17: A Computing Machine. Every programmer needs understand the basic characteristics of the underlying computer processor being used. Fortunately, the fundamental design of computer processors has changed little since the 1960s. In this lecture, we provide insights into how your Java code actually gets its job done by introducing an imaginary computer that is similar to both the minicomputers of the 1960s and the microprocessor chips found in today's laptops and mobile devices.

    Lecture 18: von Neumann Machines. Continuing our description of processor design and low-level programming, we provide context stretching back to the 1950s and discuss future implications of the von Neumann machine, where programs and data are kept in the same memory. We examine in detail the idea that we design new computers by simulating them on old ones, something that Turing's theory guarantees will always be effective.

    Lecture 19: Combinational Circuits. Starting with a few simple abstractions (wires that can carry on/off values and switches that can control the values carried by wires), we address in this lecture the design of the circuits that implement computer processors. We consider gates that implement simple logical functions and components for higher-level functions, such as addition. The lecture culminates with a full circuit for an arithmetic/logic unit.

    Lecture 20: CPU. In this lecture we provide the last part of our answer to the question "How does a computer work?" by developing a complete circuit for a computer processor, where every switch and wire is visible. While vastly different in scale, this circuit, from a design point of view, has many of the same characteristics as the circuits found in modern computational devices. 



C++

1.1 Some Remarks about Programming

Programming is a core activity in the process of performing tasks or solving problems with the aid of a computer. An idealised picture is:

[problem or task specification]   -   COMPUTER   -   [solution or completed task]

Unfortunately things are not (yet) that simple. In particular, the "specification" cannot be given to the computer using natural language. Moreover, it cannot (yet) just be a description of the problem or task, but has to contain information about how the problem is to be solved or the task is to be executed. Hence we need programming languages. Click here for a more detailed view of the problem solving pipeline.

There are many different programming languages, and many ways to classify them. For example, "high-level" programming languages are languages whose syntax is relatively close to natural language, whereas the syntax of "low-level" languages includes many technical references to the nuts and bolts (0's and 1's, etc.) of the computer. "Declarative" languages (as opposed to "imperative" or "procedural" languages) enable the programmer to minimise his or her account of how the computer is to solve a problem or produce a particular output. "Object-oriented languages" reflect a particular way of thinking about problems and tasks in terms of identifying and describing the behaviour of the relevant "objects". Smalltalk is an example of a pure object-oriented language. C++ includes facilities for object-oriented programming, as well as for more conventional procedural programming.

Proponents of different languages and styles of languages sometimes make extravagant claims. For example, it is sometimes claimed that (well written) object-oriented programs reflect the way in which humans think about solving problems. Judge for yourselves!

(BACK TO COURSE CONTENTS)
1.2 The Origins of C++

C++ was developed by Bjarne Stroustrup of AT&T Bell Laboratories in the early 1980's, and is based on the C language. The name is a pun - "++" is a syntactic construct used in C (to increment a variable), and C++ is intended as an incremental improvement of C. Most of C is a subset of C++, so that most C programs can be compiled (i.e. converted into a series of low-level instructions that the computer can execute directly) using a C++ compiler.

C is in many ways hard to categorise. Compared to assembly language it is high-level, but it nevertheless includes many low-level facilities to directly manipulate the computer's memory. It is therefore an excellent language for writing efficient "systems" programs. But for other types of programs, C code can be hard to understand, and C programs can therefore be particularly prone to certain types of error. The extra object-oriented facilities in C++ are partly included to overcome these shortcomings.

(BACK TO COURSE CONTENTS)
1.3 ANSI/ISO C++

The American National Standards Institution (ANSI) and the International Standards Organisation (ISO) provide "official" and generally accepted standard definitions of many programming languages, including C and C++. Such standards are important. A program written only in ANSI/ISO C++ is guaranteed to run on any computer whose supporting software conforms to the the standard. In other words, the standard guarantees that standard-compliant C++ programs are portable. In practice most versions of C++ include ANSI/ISO C++ as a core language, but also include extra machine-dependent features to allow smooth interaction with different computers' operating systems. These machine dependent features should be used sparingly. Moreover, when parts of a C++ program use non-compliant components of the language, these should be clearly marked, and as far a possible separated from the rest of the program, so as to make modification of the program for different machines and operating systems as easy as possible. The five most significant revisions of the C++ standard are C++98 (1998), C++03 (2003) and C++11 (2011), C++14 (2014) and C++17 (2017). The next iteration is currently expected in 2020. Of course, it can be a challenging task for software engineers, compiler writers and lecturers (!) to keep track of all the revisions that appear in each major version of the standard. You may wish to read further about the ongoing efforts that are being made to make the widely-used g++ compiler compliant with the C++11 standard and compliant with the C++14 standard.

(BACK TO COURSE CONTENTS)
1.4 The C++ Programming Environment in UNIX

The best way to learn a programming language is to try writing programs and test them on a computer! To do this, we need several pieces of software:

    An editor with which to write and modify the C++ program components or source code,
    A compiler with which to convert the source code into machine instructions which can be executed by the computer directly,
    A linking program with which to link the compiled program components with each other and with a selection of routines from existing libraries of computer code, in order to form the complete machine-executable object program,
    A debugger to help diagnose problems, either in compiling programs in the first place, or if the object program runs but gives unintended results.

There are several editors available for UNIX-based systems. Two of the most popular editors are emacs and vi. For the compiler and linker, we will be using the GNU g++ compiler/linker, and for the debugger we will be using the GNU debugger gdb. For those that prefer an integrated development environment (IDE) that combines an editor, a compiler, a linking program and a debugger in a single programming environment (in a similar way to Microsoft Developer Studio under Windows NT), there are also IDEs available for UNIX (e.g. Eclipse, xcode, kdevelop etc.)

Appendix A.1 of these notes is a brief operational guide to emacs and g++ so that you can get going without delay. If you are interested in learning more about UNIX you can click here.

(BACK TO COURSE CONTENTS)
1.5 An Example C++ Program

Here is an example of a complete C++ program:

	// The C++ compiler ignores comments which start with 
	// double slashes like this, up to the end of the line.  
	 
	/* Comments can also be written starting with a slash 
	 followed by a star, and ending with a star followed by
	 a slash. As you can see, comments written in this way 
	 can span more than one line. */ 
	
	/* Programs should ALWAYS include plenty of comments! */ 
	
	/* Author: Rob Miller and William Knottenbelt 
	 Program last changed: 30th September 2001 */ 
	 
	/* This program prompts the user for the current year, the user's 
	current age, and another year. It then calculates the age 
	that the user was or will be in the second year entered. */ 
	 
	#include <iostream> 
	
	using namespace std; 
	
	int main() 
	{ 
		int year_now, age_now, another_year, another_age; 
	 
		cout << "Enter the current year then press RETURN.\n"; 
		cin >> year_now; 
	 
		cout << "Enter your current age in years.\n"; 
		cin >> age_now; 
	 
		cout << "Enter the year for which you wish to know your age.\n";
		cin >> another_year; 
	 
		another_age = another_year - (year_now - age_now); 
	 
		if (another_age >= 0) {
			cout << "Your age in " << another_year << ": "; 
			cout << another_age << "\n";
		} else { 
			cout << "You weren't even born in ";
			cout << another_year << "!\n"; 
		}
	
		return 0; 
	}

Program 1.5.1

This program illustrates several general features of all C++ programs. It begins (after the comment lines) with the statement

#include <iostream>

This statement is called an include directive. It tells the compiler and the linker that the program will need to be linked to a library of routines that handle input from the keyboard and output to the screen (specifically the cin and cout statements that appear later). The header file "iostream" contains basic information about this library. You will learn much more about libraries of code later in this course.

After the include directive is the line:

using namespace std;

This statement is called a using directive. The latest versions of the C++ standard divide names (e.g. cin and cout) into subcollections of names called namespaces. This particular using directive says the program will be using names that have a meaning defined for them in the std namespace (in this case the iostream header defines meanings for cout and cin in the std namespace).

Some older C++ compilers do not support namespaces. In this case you can use the older form of the include directive (that does not require a using directive, and places all names in a single global namespace):

#include <iostream.h>

Some of the legacy code you encounter in industry may be written using this older style for headers.

Because the program is short, it is easily packaged up into a single list of program statements and commands. After the include and using directives, the basic structure of the program is:

	int main() 
	{
		First statement;
		...
		...
		Last statement;
	
		return 0;
	}

All C++ programs have this basic "top-level" structure. Notice that each statement in the body of the program ends with a semicolon. In a well-designed large program, many of these statements will include references or calls to sub-programs, listed after the main program or in a separate file. These sub-programs have roughly the same outline structure as the program here, but there is always exactly one such structure called main. Again, you will learn more about sub-programs later in the course.

When at the end of the main program, the line

return 0;

means "return the value 0 to the computer's operating system to signal that the program has completed successfully". More generally, return statements signal that the particular sub-program has finished, and return a value, along with the flow of control, to the program level above. More about this later.

Our example program uses four variables:

year_now, age_now, another_year and another_age

Program variables are not like variables in mathematics. They are more like symbolic names for "pockets of computer memory" which can be used to store different values at different times during the program execution. These variables are first introduced in our program in the variable declaration

	int year_now, age_now, another_year, another_age;

which signals to the compiler that it should set aside enough memory to store four variables of type "int" (integer) during the rest of the program execution. Hence variables should always be declared before being used in a program. Indeed, it is considered good style and practice to declare all the variables to be used in a program or sub-program at the beginning. Variables can be one of several different types in C++, and we will discuss variables and types at some length later.

(BACK TO COURSE CONTENTS)
1.6 Very Simple Input, Output and Assignment

After we have compiled the program above, we can run it. The result will be something like

	Enter current year then press RETURN.
	1996
	Enter your current age in years.
	36
	Enter the year for which you wish to know your age.
	2011
	Your age in 2011: 51

The first, third, fifth and seventh lines above are produced on the screen by the program. In general, the program statement

	cout << Expression1 << Expression2 << ... << ExpressionN;

will produce the screen output

	Expression1Expression2...ExpressionN

The series of statements

	cout << Expression1; 
	cout << Expression2;
	... 
	... 
	cout << ExpressionN;

will produce an identical output. If spaces or new lines are needed between the output expressions, these have to be included explicitly, with a " " or a "\n" respectively. The expression endl can also be used to output a new line, and in many cases is preferable to using "\n" since it has the side-effect of flushing the output buffer (output is often stored internally and printed in chunks when sufficient output has been accumulated; using endl forces all output to appear on the screen immediately).

The numbers in bold in the example screen output above have been typed in by the user. In this particular program run, the program statement

	cin >> year_now;

has resulted in the variable year_now being assigned the value 2001 at the point when the user pressed RETURN after typing in "2001". Programs can also include assignment statements, a simple example of which is the statement

	another_age = another_year - (year_now - age_now);

Hence the symbol = means "is assigned the value of". ("Equals" is represented in C++ as ==.)

(BACK TO COURSE CONTENTS)
1.7 Simple Flow of Control

The last few lines of our example program (other than "return 0") are:

	if (another_age >= 0) {
		cout << "Your age in " << another_year << ": ";
		cout << another_age << "\n";
	}
	else { 
		cout << "You weren't even born in ";
		cout << another_year << "!\n";
	}

The "if ... else ..." branching mechanism is a familiar construct in many procedural programming languages. In C++, it is simply called an if statement, and the general syntax is

	if (condition) {
		Statement1;
		...
		...
		StatementN;
	} else {
		StatementN+1;
		...
		...
		StatementN+M;
	}

The "else" part of an "if statement" may be omitted, and furthermore, if there is just one Statement after the "if (condition)", it may be simply written as

	if (condition)
		Statement;

It is quite common to find "if statements" strung together in programs, as follows:

	...
	...
	if (total_test_score < 50)
		cout << "You are a failure. You must study much harder.\n";
	else if (total_test_score < 65)
		cout << "You have just scraped through the test.\n";
	else if (total_test_score < 80)
		cout << "You have done quite well.\n";
	else if (total_test_score < 95)
		cout << "Your score is excellent. Well done.\n";
	else {
		cout << "You cheated!\n";
		total_test_score = 0;
	}
	...
	...

This program fragment has quite a complicated logical structure, but we can confirm that it is legal in C++ by referring to the syntax diagram for "if statements". In such diagrams, the terms enclosed in ovals or circles refer to program components that literally appear in programs. Terms enclosed in boxes refer to program components that require further definition, perhaps with another syntax diagram. A collection of such diagrams can serve as a formal definition of a programming language's syntax (although they do not help distinguish between good and bad programming style!).

Below is the syntax diagram for an "if statement". It is best understood in conjunction with the syntax diagram for a "statement". In particular, notice that the diagram doesn't explicitly include the ";" or "{}" delimiters, since these are built into the definition (syntax diagram) of "statement".



1.7.1 Syntax diagram for an If Statement

The C++ compiler accepts the program fragment in our example by counting all of the bold text in

	...
	...
	if (total_test_score < 50)
		cout << "You are a failure. You must study much harder.\n";
	else if (total_test_score < 65)
		cout << "You have just scraped through the test.\n";
	else if (total_test_score < 80)
		cout << "You have done quite well.\n";
	else if (total_test_score < 95)
		cout << "Your score is excellent. Well done.\n";
	else {
		cout << "You cheated!\n";
		total_test_score = 0;
	}
	...
	...

as the single statement which must follow the first else.

(BACK TO COURSE CONTENTS)
1.8 Preliminary Remarks about Program Style

As far as the C++ compiler is concerned, the following program is exactly the same as the program in Section 1.5:

    #include <iostream> using namespace std; int main() 
    { int year_now, age_now, another_year, another_age; cout << 
    "Enter the current year then press RETURN.\n"; cin >> year_now; cout 
    << "Enter your current age in years.\n"; cin >> age_now; cout << 
    "Enter the year for which you wish to know your age.\n"; cin >> 
    another_year; another_age = another_year - (year_now - age_now); if 
    (another_age >= 0) { cout << "Your age in " << another_year << ": "; 
    cout << another_age << "\n"; } else { cout << 
    "You weren't even born in "; cout << another_year << "!\n"; } return 
    0; }

However, the lack of program comments, spaces, new lines and indentation makes this program unacceptable. There is much more to developing a good programming style than learning to lay out programs properly, but it is a good start! Be consistent with your program layout, and make sure the indentation and spacing reflects the logical structure of your program. It is also a good idea to pick meaningful names for variables; "year_now", "age_now", "another_year" and "another__age" are better names than "y_n", "a_n", "a_y" and "a_a", and much better than "w", "x", "y" and "z". Although popular, "temp" and "tmp" are particularly uninformative variable names and should be avoided. Remember that your programs might need modification by other programmers at a later date.

(BACK TO COURSE CONTENTS)
1.9 Summary

We have briefly and informally introduced a number of topics in this lecture: variables and types, input and output, assignment, and conditional statements ("if statements"). We will go into each of these topics more formally and in more detail later in the course. The material here is also covered in more detail in Savitch, Chapter 1, Section 2.4 and Section 2.5.

